--- Page 1 ---
JCST Papers
Only for Academic and Non-Commercial Use
Thanks for Reading!
 Survey
Computer Architecture and Systems
Artificial Intelligence and Pattern Recognition
Computer Graphics and Multimedia
Data Management and Data Mining
Software Systems
Computer Networks and Distributed Computing
Theory and Algorithms
Emerging Areas
 
JCST URL: https://jcst.ict.ac.cn
SPRINGER URL: https://www.springer.com/journal/11390
E-mail: jcst@ict.ac.cn
Online Submission: https://mc03.manuscriptcentral.com/jcst
JCST WeChat
Subscription Account
Twitter: JCST_Journal
LinkedIn: Journal of Computer Science and Technology

--- Page 2 ---
 
From MOOC to MAIC: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning
Through LLM-Driven Agents
Ji-Fan Yu1 (于济凡), Daniel Zhang-Li2 (张李牛牛), Zhe-Yuan Zhang2 (张哲源), Yu-Cheng Wang2 (王禹诚)
Hao-Xuan Li3 (黎昊轩), Joy Jia Yin Lim2 (林佳音), Zhan-Xin Hao1 (郝展欣), Shang-Qing Tu2 (涂尚卿)
Lu Zhang1 (张　露), Xu-Sheng Dai1 (戴旭升), Jian-Xiao Jiang1 (蒋建骁), Shen Yang1 (杨　慎)
Fei Qin1 (覃　菲), Ze-Kun Li1 (李泽坤), Bing-Lin Liu2 (刘炳麟), Xin Cong4 (从　鑫)
Bin Xu2 (许　斌), Distinguished Member, CCF, Lei Hou2 (侯　磊), Man-Li Li1 (李曼丽), Juan-Zi Li1 (李涓子)
Hui-Qin Liu1, * (刘惠琴), Yu Zhang1 (张　羽), Zhi-Yuan Liu2, * (刘知远), Distinguished Member, CCF
and Mao-Song Sun2 (孙茂松), Distinguished Member, CCF
1 School of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3 College of AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
4 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
E-mail: yujifan@tsinghua.edu.cn; zlnn23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zheyuan4@andrew.cmu.edu
wang-yc24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; hx-li25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lin-jy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zhanxin_hao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; tsq25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lou-zhan24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
dxs23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; jjx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; yangshen22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
qinfei.2018@tsinghua.org.cn; li-zk25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lbl23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
congxin1995@tsinghua.edu.cn; xubin@tsinghua.edu.cn; houlei@tsinghua.edu.cn; marylee@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
lijuanzi@tsinghua.edu.cn; liuhq@tsinghua.edu.cn; zhangyu2011@tsinghua.edu.cn; liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn
sms@tsinghua.edu.cn
Received September 30, 2025; accepted December 30, 2025.
Abstract    Since the first instances of online education, where courses were uploaded to accessible and shared
online platforms, this form of scaling the dissemination of human knowledge to reach a broader audience has
sparked extensive discussion and widespread adoption. Since personalized learning still holds significant potential
for improvement, new artificial intelligence (AI) technologies have been continuously integrated into this learn-
ing format, resulting in a variety of educational AI applications such as educational recommendation and intelli-
gent tutoring. The emergence of intelligence in large language models (LLMs) has allowed these educational en-
hancements to be built upon a unified foundational model, enabling deeper integration. In this context, we pro-
pose MAIC (Massive AI-Empowered Course), a new form of online education that leverages LLM-driven multi-
agent systems to construct an AI-augmented classroom, balancing scalability with adaptivity. Beyond exploring
the conceptual framework and technical innovations, we conduct preliminary experiments at Tsinghua Universi-
ty, Beijing, one of the leading universities in China. Drawing from more than 100 000 learning records of more
than 500 students, we obtain a series of valuable observations and initial analyses. This project will continue to
evolve, ultimately aiming to establish a comprehensive open platform that supports and unifies research, technol-
ogy, and applications to explore the possibilities of online education in the era of large-model AI. We envision this
platform as a collaborative hub that brings together educators, researchers, and innovators to collectively explore
 
 
Regular Paper
Special Issue: Celebrating the 40th Anniversary of JCST
The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62407027, the Tsinghua Uni-
versity Initiative Scientific Research Program under Grant No. 2024THZWJC11, and a grant from the Institute for Guo Qiang, Ts-
inghua University.
*Corresponding Author (Hui-Qin Liu provided guidance and advice on educational experiments and theoretical analysis. Zhi-
Yuan Liu guided system architecture and algorithm design.)
Yu JF, Zhang-Li D, Zhang ZY et al. From MOOC to MAIC: Reimagine online teaching and learning through LLM-driv-
en  agents.  JOURNAL  OF  COMPUTER  SCIENCE  AND  TECHNOLOGY,  41(1):  394−414,  Jan.  2026.  DOI: 10.1007/
s11390-025-6000-0, CSTR: 32374.14.s11390-025-6000-0
©Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2026

--- Page 3 ---
the future of AI-driven online education.
Keywords    intelligent tutoring system, large language model (LLM), multi-agent system, online education
 
 1    Introduction
Explicit Background: Evolution for Scalability. The
evolution of online education stands as a testament to
humanity’s relentless pursuit of knowledge, transcend-
ing  the  limitations  of  time  and  space[1].  From  the
humble beginnings of oral tradition to the advent of
the  printed  book[2, 3],  education  has  continuously
sought  ways  to  expand  its  reach.  However,  for  cen-
turies, the traditional model of education was bound
by the constraints of physical classrooms, limited re-
sources,  and  localized  instruction.  The  dawn  of  the
Internet  marked  a  revolutionary  shift,  heralding  the
age of online education, where the dream of universal
access  to  knowledge  began  to  take  a  tangible  form.
Specifically,  the  Massive  Open  Online  Course
(MOOC)  phenomenon  marks  a  significant  milestone
in  the  evolution  of  online  education,  reflecting  both
technological  advancement  and  educational  innova-
270
100
tion[4]. Since then, platforms such as edX①, which in-
volves  institutions  such  as  MIT  and  Harvard,  and
Coursera②, which originates from Stanford, have inte-
grated  learning  resources  from  more  than 
renowned  universities[5, 6].  These  platforms  have  at-
tracted more than  million learners globally, pro-
gressively realizing the scalability of online education.
Implicit Motivation: Determination of Adaptivity.
However, this paradigm of serving thousands of learn-
ers from diverse backgrounds through one pre-record-
ed video[7] (as shown in Fig.1) struggles to align with
the  educational  philosophy  of “teaching  in  accor-
dance  with  individual  aptitudes”[8, 9].  This  challenge
has become a significant reason for the subsequent ef-
forts  that  introduce  AI  techniques  into  online  learn-
ing. To achieve the adaptivity of learning, a series of
tasks such as learning path planning[10, 11], course rec-
ommendation[12–14],  and  intelligent  tutoring[15, 16]—
driven  by  technologies  like  recommendation  systems
 
Teach
Learn
Course Content Creation
Video Creation
Recording Editing
Preparing
Writing
Scripts
Teacher
 Video
Video
Students
MOOC
 MAIC
Personalize:
Customize the Course
Read:
Construct Teaching Agenda and KB
Student
Teacher Agent 
 Classmate Agents 
Assistant Agent 
 Analyzer Agent 
TextbooksSlides
Exercises
 Videos
Course Description
Course Objective
Teaching Style
Watching
MOOC Videos
Student Exercises
Plan:
Generate Functions
and Agents
Upload:
Upload Materials
Teacher
Offine
Mentoring
Doing
Quiz
1 Video for N   Students  N Agents for 1 Student 
$ 25 000 
60 Hours
Less Than $ 2 and 30 min per Course to Make a Course
Designing
Today, let's talk about
large language models.
We know that they
learn from a massive
amount of data, but ...
Wow! If there are plenty
of data, how can we
know the relation to
certain abilities? Can
you explain more?
Let's do a little quiz!
What is the first stage to
train an LLM?
A. Pre-training; B. SFT;
C. Instruction tuning;
D. RLHF
Based on your quiz
results, I suggest you
to improve by learning
some prerequisite
courses, such as ...
Teacher
 
Fig.1.  MOOC vs MAIC (Massive AI-Empowered Course) from the aspects of teaching and learning.
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 395
 ①https://www.edx.org/, Jan. 2026.
 ②https://www.coursera.org/, Jan. 2026.

--- Page 4 ---
and dialogue generation— have been employed to en-
hance the student learning experience.
Although  these  technologies  have  been  applied
across  various  aspects  of  teaching  and  learning,  the
significant differences among the supporting tasks be-
fore,  during,  and  after  instruction  have  posed  chal-
lenges for unifying them under a single deep learning
framework[17].  Such  fragmentation  has,  in  part,  de-
layed the emergence of a new platform where AI and
online learning are fully integrated. However, with the
rapid  advancement  of  generative  AI[18],  large  lan-
guage  models  (LLMs)  have  created  fresh  opportuni-
ties for AI-powered learning paradigms. Models such
as GPT-4[19] and LLaMA[20] possess strong generaliza-
tion  capabilities  and  encapsulate  vast  parametric
knowledge,  allowing  for  the  flexible  configuration  of
intelligent  agents[21] built  upon  them.  Currently,
LLM-driven multi-agent systems[22] have already been
explored for applications such as social simulation[23]
and the execution of complex tasks such as software
development[24].  This  progress  opens  up  a  potential
pathway  for  introducing  multi-agent  systems  to  cre-
ate entirely new online teaching and learning experi-
ences.
Proposal  of  MAIC.  At  the  critical  juncture  of  a
new era defined by LLMs and multi-agent systems in
online  education,  we  introduce  MAIC  (Massive  AI-
Empowered Course). MAIC is dedicated to exploring
the integration of multi-agent systems across various
stages  of  online  learning,  including  course  construc-
tion,  project-based  learning,  classroom  instruction,
and analysis, with the goal of balancing the scalabili-
ty and adaptivity of online education. The core con-
cept of MAIC is to construct a series of LLM-driven
agents  to  support  the  whole  teaching  and  learning
processes  in  the  online  educational  environment.  As
shown  in Fig.1,  the  paradigm  of  MOOC  and  MAIC
can be featured with two primary aspects as follows.
Teaching.  This  action  is  primarily  performed  by
instructors. In MOOCs, instructors are responsible for
thoroughly  preparing  course  materials,  drafting  lec-
ture  notes,  and  spending  considerable  time  meticu-
lously  recording  courses.  The  final  output  typically
consists  of  a  series  of  pre-recorded  instructional
videos.  Within  the  proposed  MAIC  framework,  in-
structors  initiate  the  course  development  process  by
uploading  diverse  raw  instructional  resources.  Lever-
aging  a  collaborative  multi-agent  architecture  with
human-in-the-loop  oversight,  the  system  facilitates
the  interactive  construction  of  didactic  slide  decks
and the automated provisioning of associated experi-
ential learning environments. This integrated pipeline
enables  end-to-end  AI-assisted  authoring  of  courses,
spanning  pedagogical  content  structuring,  multi-
modal resource synthesis, and computational environ-
ment  orchestration,  thus  streamlining  the  scalable
production of AI-centric curricula.
Learning. In MOOCs[7], a single set of course ma-
terials is designed to serve thousands of students with
diverse  backgrounds,  and  the  pace  of  instruction  is
predetermined  by  instructors,  leaving  room  for  im-
proving  personalized  adaptation  based  on  individual
student  needs[25].  In  MAIC,  course  delivery  is  au-
tonomously  completed  by  AI  instructor  agents  that
dynamically adapt pedagogical strategies in real time,
conditioned on multimodal student interaction traces
and  latent  knowledge  state  estimation.  The  system
further  deploys  role-specialized  AI  peers,  including
teaching  assistants  and  customizable  classmates,
which enables learners to curate personalized collabo-
rative  ecologies  for  dialectical  engagement,  affective
support,  and  metacognitive  prompting.  Crucially,
MAIC extends adaptive learning to cooperative tasks,
in  which  students  are  assigned  to  finish  the  given
tasks with peer AI agents. It integrates real-time adap-
tation, social learning, and contextual task generation,
aiming to guide students with suitable challenges.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of MAIC,
and  present  an  intuitive  and  user-friendly  solution
that accommodates the needs of various users, includ-
ing students and educators. This platform comes pre-
equipped with a suite of intelligent agents and tools
that support course analysis and the construction of
new MAIC course examples. Additionally, MAIC in-
tegrates  several  learning  analytics  tools  powered  by
large models, enabling quick access to learning data,
forecasting academic outcomes, and automating tasks
such as interviews and assessments.
500
With the support of Tsinghua University, Beijing,
one of China’s top universities, we conduct an explo-
ration  of  this  new  learning  model  over  a  period  of
more  than  three  months.  Assisted  by  over  stu-
dent  volunteers,  we  implement  the  study  using  two
courses: the AI course “Towards Artificial General In-
telligence” (TAGI)  and  the  learning  science  course
“How to Study in the University” (HSU). During this
pilot,  we  collect  over 100 000 behavioral  records.
Based on the data from these courses, along with stu-
dent  survey  measurements  and  qualitative  interview
results, we conduct an initial analysis of the features
396 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1

--- Page 5 ---
and performance of the MAIC system. In subsequent
sections, we will introduce key components, technical
implementation, and real-world results③.
 2    Related Work
The evolution of education has undergone several
transformative  phases[5, 14, 26].  Below,  we  review  the
developments in chronological order.
Pre-ITS Era. Before the rise of intelligent tutor-
ing  systems  (ITSs)[27],  education  was  dominated  by
traditional  paradigms  such  as  Aristocratic  Educa-
tion[28] and Classroom Education[29], which were con-
strained  by  physical  and  temporal  limitations.  The
advent  of  the  Internet  led  to  scalable  education
paradigms such as MOOC[30] and Live Class[31]. While
these  platforms  significantly  broadened  access,  they
lacked  individualized  support,  highlighting  the  need
for  more  responsive  educational  technologies.  Some
rule-based intelligent tutoring systems were proposed
in 1990s[32], which opened a path to more scalable ed-
ucation systems[33].
Deep  Learning  Stage.  Early  AI  integrations  into
education began with Question Answering (QA) sys-
tems, which aim to emulate pedagogical interactions.
Systems such as Knowledge-Based Question Answer-
ing  (KBQA)[34] and  methods  inspired  by  Socratic
Questioning[35] allow  for  basic  automated  dialogue.
Landmark  systems  such  as  AutoTutor[36] and
SCOT[37] support  natural  language  interactions,  yet
are  limited  by  predefined  scripts  and  knowledge
boundaries.  More  recent  systems  such  as  MAssist-
ant[38] improve contextual understanding but still op-
erate within narrow functional scopes. To address the
need  for  personalized  learning  pathways,  adaptive
testing systems emerged[39]. Techniques such as Deep
Knowledge  Tracing  (DKT)[40],  and  NeuralCD  (Neu-
ral  Cognitive  Diagnosis)[41] use  machine  learning  to
dynamically  adjust  question  difficulty  and  content
based on learner performance.
LLM  Age. With  advances  in  LLMs,  educational
chatbots  gained  prominence.  Systems  such  as  Khan-
migo④ and  ChatGPT-Edu⑤ leverage  LLMs  to  pro-
vide  more  flexible  and  context-aware  interactions.
These platforms enable continuous dialogue and sup-
port  across  diverse  subjects,  offering  a  more  immer-
sive experience than earlier QA systems. Building on
chatbot  capabilities,  single-agent  systems  such  as
EduChat[42] and LittleMu[16] integrate additional edu-
cational  functionalities,  such  as  feedback  generation
and  exercise  recommendation,  within  a  unified  AI
agent.  The  limitations  of  single-agent  systems
prompted  research  into  collaborative  multi-agent  ar-
chitectures  for  more  complex  educational  tasks.
Frameworks such as CODIA⑥ and the proposed MA-
IC leverage LLM-driven agents, where these systems
support  rich,  synchronous  classroom-like  experiences
and  scale  personalized  instruction  through  agent  co-
operation. By distributing capabilities across special-
ized modules, they achieve a new level of adaptivity
and engagement.
Towards Ideal ITS. The ultimate goal of ITSs is
to  create  an  adaptive,  empathetic,  and  cognitively
supportive learning environment—an ideal ITS. While
current  systems,  including  multi-agent  platforms,
have made significant strides, persistent gaps remain.
Achieving this vision hinges on two axes: 1) scalabili-
ty-cost-efficient  authoring,  deployment,  and  delivery
at massive scale; 2) adaptivity-fine-grained, real-time
diagnosis and guidance tailored to each learner.
 3    MAIC
In this section, we introduce the major components
for implementing the MAIC platform. Specifically, we
present  the  main  workflows  designed  for  certain
teaching  process  and  the  adaptive  engine  integrated
with  the  designed  multi-agent  learning  environment,
shown in Fig.2.
 3.1    Teaching: MAIC Course Preparation
MAIC-Craft: Anything to MAIC. MAIC-Craft is a
sub-system  in  MAIC  that  develops  a  standardized
course  preparation  workflow  (shown  in Fig.3)  to
transform vast amounts of weakly structured and het-
erogeneous  learning  resources  into  highly  structured
and  adaptive  learning  materials,  unifying  the  inges-
tion  and  structuring  of  diverse  formats  and  modali-
ties.  Targeting  at  scalability,  this  workflow  is  de-
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 397
 ③For advanced open-source technologies and impressive cases of MAIC, please refer to the project site: https://project.maic.chat/,
Jan. 2026.
 ④https://blog.khanacademy.org/teacher-khanmigo/, Jan. 2026.
 ⑤https://openai.com/index/introducing-chatgpt-edu/, Jan. 2026.
 ⑥https://code.bdaa.pro/, Jan. 2026.

--- Page 6 ---
signed to streamline the workload of experts while ac-
commodating diverse educational resource formats, fa-
cilitating the scalability of this online learning model
for  broader  implementation.  The  course  preparation
workflow of MAIC-Craft consists of two stages: read
and plan.
 3.1.1    Read Stage
At  this  stage,  instructors  (and  authorized  teach-
 
Teaching
Learning
Adaptive Engine
Multi-Agent Classroom Learning
MAIC-Craft
ANY Educational
Material
 
 Read
MAIC Course
MAIC Agents
Plan
Cognitive Student Modeling
Interview
Student Profile
- Basic Information
- Academic Profile
- Interest Profile
Token-Level Personalization
Dm
Student
Profile
In-Depth
Discussion
Emotional
Companionship
Teacher
Assistant
Classmate
Lecture
Scripts
1. Query Generation
Q1
Q1
Qn
Adapted
Content LLM
Pedagogical Theories3. Generation
Dm
DmEducational
Sources
2. Open-Ended RAG
Multi-Modal
Content Extraction
Knowledge Base
Construction
Classroom
ManagementTeaching and
Initiation
Bloom's Taxonomy
Vygotsky's ZPD
UDL
 
Fig.2.  Illustration of the conceptual structure of MAIC. RAG: retrieval-augmented generation. 
(a) (b)
Any
Input
Slides Content Extraction
Knowledge Base Construction
Course Component Generation
Pn
P4
P3Textual
Content
...
P2
P1
Visual
Content
P1
 P2
 P3
 P4 ...
 Pn
Description Generation
P1
 P1
P1
P1
 P1
P1
D1
Multi-Agent
Processing
Chapter 1: Multi-Agent Systems
 Section 1: Introduction
 
D1
D2
P1
 P1
P2
 P2
Knowledge Base Generation
Dn
 Pn
 Pn
...
...
...
LectureScript
Supply Narrative Guidance for
Real-Time Teaching
Question Generation and
Assessment
Quiz
...
...
Agent Generation
Teacher
Classmate(s)
Assistant
Analyzer
Manager
Other Agents
Teach & Answer
Questions
Initiate Ideas &
Discussions
Maintain Order
& Assist
Analyze Learning
Performance
Control the Class
Customized by
Users!
?
Slides Videos
Audios Docs
D1
D1
Core Visual Presentation with
Layouts and Interactive Elements
Canvas
Section 2: Recent Work
 
Fig.3.  Illustration of the course preparation workflow of MAIC-Craft. (a) Read stage. (b) Plan stage.
398 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1

--- Page 7 ---
R = fRig1ijRj
~R = f(Ri; D i; K )g1ijRj
Ri
Di
K
ing assistants) are involved by providing any educa-
tional  material.  With  the  assistance  of  multi-agent
systems  empowered  by  LLMs,  they  upload  a  set  of
educational  resources ,  which  can  in-
clude course slides, textbooks, videos, audio lectures,
or any combination thereof. These resources are then
transformed  into  highly  structured  intelligent  learn-
ing  resources  along  with
multiple  AI  agents  designed  for  classroom  construc-
tion. The  and  here correspond to a single re-
source unit and its comprehensive textual description,
respectively,  while  denotes  the  knowledge-aware
section extracted from each resource.
Rt
i
Rv
i
Rt
i
f 1
T : Ri ! (Rt
i; R v
i )
f 1
T
Multimodal  Content  Extraction. MAIC-Craft  em-
ploys multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) to capture content
across  diverse  modalities.  For  any  given  educational
resource, the system extracts textual content  and
visual content , where  encompasses direct textu-
al  content,  transcribed  content  from  audio  sources,
i.e., .  This  functional  model 
leverages multimodal architectures and can be contin-
uously  improved  through  emerging  LLM  techniques.
The  implementation  integrates  vision-language  mod-
els for visual processing, automatic speech recognition
for audio transcription, and document parsers for tex-
tual extraction, all within a unified processing pipeline.
(Rt
i; R v
i )
f 2
T : (Rt
i; R v
i ) !
Di
f 3
T : (Rt
i; R v
i ; D i) ! K
K
~R
Knowledge  Base  Construction.  After  preprocess-
ing the uploaded resources, MAIC-Craft employs ex-
traction  functions  to  complete  the  read  stage.  The
multimodal content  is processed by an ML-
LM-based method that generates comprehensive and
pedagogically-aware descriptions, i.e., 
 . Simultaneously, MAIC-Craft implements a knowl-
edge extraction methodology that organizes the edu-
cational  content  into  a  structured  knowledge  base,
building  taxonomic  relationships  across  different  re-
source  modalities,  i.e., ,  where
  represents  the  structured  knowledge  base  compo-
nents that constitute the final structured resource set
 . The knowledge base maintains long-context coher-
ence across extensive educational content and teach-
ing smoothness.
 3.1.2    Plan Stage
At  this  stage,  instructors  (and  authorized  teach-
ing assistants) are involved through human-AI collab-
orative  refinement  processes.  Based  on  the  highly
structured  resources,  MAIC-Craft  constructs  an  in-
structional  action  representation  language,  enabling
the  incorporation  of  flexible  teaching  functions  such
as interactive content presentation, adaptive question-
ing,  and  multimodal  content  delivery  into  preset
classrooms. This naturally integrates with related ed-
ucational  technologies  like  lecture  script  generation
and adaptive question generation. Meanwhile, leverag-
ing intelligent agent construction techniques, the plat-
form utilizes the processed content to provide teach-
ers  with  AI-driven  pedagogical  agents,  facilitating
comprehensive  course  planning  and  foundational
structure development.
C
C = (type; content; metadata)
type
metadata
Course Component Generation. MAIC-Craft con-
ceptualizes educational activities as structured course
components. Each course component  is defined as
 , where  indicates the
component category (e.g., Canvas, Quiz, LectureScri-
pt), content details  the  educational  material,  and
  provides pedagogical context. This approach
reflects principles of modularity and extensibility, al-
lowing  course  components  to  be  easily  configurable
and reusable across different educational contexts.
(Cn; ^RC)
f 4
T : ~R ! ~Rcomponents
f 5
T : ~R !
~Rquiz
Each component is associated with the generation
of  specific  type  of  educational  content,  denoted  as
 . Among these components, the most funda-
mental  component  category  is  Canvas,  as  it  consti-
tutes  the  core  visual  presentation  framework  of  the
instructional  process.  Category  Canvas  components
integrate  visual  layouts,  interactive  elements,  and
structured content presentation, while category Quiz
components  provide  question  generation  and  assess-
ment  logic,  and  category  LectureScript  components
supply narrative guidance. Based on this foundation,
MAIC-Craft  provides  a  course  content  generation
pipeline based on long-context encoding methods and
multimodal  understanding,  supporting  both  funda-
mental  teaching  procedures  and  interactive  compo-
nents,  i.e., .  The  system  provides
component  generation  functions  such  as 
  for quiz creation. All generated components are
subject to instructor review and refinement, ensuring
pedagogical quality and correctness.
aT
aTA
Agent Generation. Instructors can provide person-
alized  pedagogical  information  (including  teaching
styles, voice characteristics, and supplementary course
materials) to build customized teaching agents, such
as teacher agent  and teaching assistant agent .
MAIC-Craft  provides  agentization  toolkits  imple-
mented  via  LLMs,  supporting  high-level  customiza-
tion  of  these  pedagogical  agents.  The  uploaded  sup-
plementary  materials  are  segmented  and  integrated
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 399

--- Page 8 ---
into  different  intelligent  agents  using  the  RAG  (re-
trieval-augmented  generation)  technology,  enabling
contextually-aware  and  personalized  educational  in-
teractions.  These  technological  innovations  are  thor-
oughly  evaluated  in  concurrent  academic  investiga-
tions.
 3.2    MAIC Adaptive Engine
To address the limitations of standardized curricu-
la, MAIC introduces the adaptive engine, which dy-
namically  transforms  uniform  instructional  text  into
learner-specific content conditioned on each student’s
background  and  interests.  Specifically,  we  employ  a
two-stage  pipeline:  1)  cognitive  student  modeling,
which  constructs  a  detailed  profile  for  each  student,
and  2)  token-level  personalization,  which  adapts
scripts at a granular level.
 3.2.1    Cognitive Student Modeling
Effective personalization begins with a comprehen-
sive student model. Meanwhile, as LLM-based knowl-
edge  tracing  techniques  become  more  mature[43],  we
employ a conversational agent to engage the student
in  a  natural  dialogue  to  capture  both  academic  and
affective  data.  Academic  features  (e.g.,  major,  year)
inform an initial estimate of the student’s knowledge,
while  affective  features  (e.g.,  interests,  hobbies)  pro-
vide context for enhancing the script’s relevance and
engagement. The unstructured conversational history
is then parsed by a summarization agent. This agent
extracts  salient  details  and  organizes  them  into  a
structured  profile  containing  machine-readable  tags
(e.g.,  Domain:  Sport.  Category:  Basketball),  which
serves as a robust and actionable model for personal-
ization.  Listing  A1⑦ shows  an  example  of  our  con-
structed student profile.
 3.2.2    Token-Level Personalization
Based on the established student model, we adapt
the  standardized  script  to  the  student’s  needs.  Our
objective  is  to  perform  subtle,  token-level  adjust-
ments that enhance relevance and engagement with-
out  altering  the  core  pedagogical  content.  This  pro-
cess  unfolds  in  two  primary  phases:  knowledge  re-
trieval and content adaptation.
Open-Ended Knowledge Retrieval. To ground the
personalization in factually accurate and contextually-
rich  information,  we  design  an  open-ended  retrieval
mechanism, which mitigates the risk of LLM halluci-
nations by providing relevant, up-to-date information
for the generation phase. First, we employ an LLM to
analyze the student model and the educational topic
of the standardized content, and create precise search
queries. These queries are then executed, and the re-
sults undergo retrieval and filtering to prioritize high-
quality  educational  and  scholarly  sources.  Subse-
quently, the retrieved documents are segmented into
semantic chunks, embedded as vectors, and stored in
a  temporary  vector  database.  We  identify  the  top-k
most relevant chunks based on their cosine similarity
to  the  original  content,  to  serve  as  supplementary
context for the next generation phase.
Pedagogically-Guided  Content  Adaptation. In  the
final phase, we employ an RAG framework to rewrite
the educational script while maintaining instructional
integrity. Initially, a rule-based filter assesses content
segments to determine their personalization suitabili-
ty,  preserving  short,  transitional,  or  elementary  sen-
tences in their original form. For eligible segments, we
design a structured prompt to guide the content gen-
eration, operationalizing established pedagogical theo-
ries, as follows.
1) Bloom’s  taxonomy:  to  ensure  adaptations  ap-
propriately scaffolded across a hierarchy of cognitive
levels, from basic knowledge to advanced synthesis.
2) Vygotsky’s  zone  of  proximal  development
(ZPD): to select and adapt content that is optimally
challenging and promotes learning.
3) Universal design for learning (UDL): to inform
diverse  adaptations,  such  as  contextually  relevant
analogies and illustrative examples.
This  prompt  is  explicitly  constrained  to  preserve
core  concepts,  maintain  logical  structure,  and  make
only subtle changes. To ensure a natural and coher-
ent output, it removes any direct mentions of person-
alization (e.g., “Based on your interest...”). This prin-
cipled approach ensures the final content is not only
personalized, but also pedagogically effective.
 3.3    Learning: Multi-Agent Classroom
Building  on Subsections 3.1 and 3.2,  focusing  on
scalability and adaptivity, real deployments must bal-
ance and co-optimize in both directions. We then dive
into the details of the environment (shown in Fig.4),
400 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1
 ⑦https://jcst.ict.ac.cn/en/supplement/c2f85ed8-5f28-4a37-a5ea-ffdf4a3a9ac4, Jan. 2026.

--- Page 9 ---
a  carefully  designed  multi-agent  education  environ-
ment  that  couples  scale-efficient  orchestration  with
learner-level personalization.
 3.3.1    Environment Principles
MAIC-CPL:  Classroom  Peer  Learning. Student
learning in MAIC follows a “1 Student user + N AI
Agents” model.  In  such  an  environment,  the  AI
teacher  controls  the  learning  progress  based  on  the
highly  structured  instructional  action  representation
language  mentioned  earlier,  explains  course  content,
poses  questions,  and  navigates  PowerPoint  slides,
while  the  AI  teaching  assistant  maintains  classroom
order  and  prevents  content  deviation.  Students  can
interrupt the teacher at any time, ask questions, and
engage in discussions, and the intelligent agents con-
tinuously adjust the teaching process and some con-
tent based on the students’ performance. The design
principles  for  constructing  this  immersive  adaptive
classroom  originate  from  the  following  two  con-
cerns[44]. 1) How to ensure that the classroom covers
the core classroom behaviors? 2) How to maintain the
entirety  of  the  interaction  within  the  natural  flow
during the class?
In addressing the first concern, we systematically
classify classroom interaction behaviors in accordance
with established educational principles, as delineated
in Schwanke’s seminal work[45]. 1) Teaching and Initi-
ation (TI) encompasses the instructive actions of the
teacher  and  the  responsive  feedback  or  insights  pro-
vided  by  students;  2)  In-depth  Discussion  (ID)  in-
volves the alignment, deliberation, and iterative ques-
tion-and-answer  exchanges  between  the  teacher  and
students,  which  are  instrumental  in  facilitating  stu-
dents’ conceptual comprehension; 3) Emotional Com-
panionship  (EC)  pertains  to  the  encouragement  of
student learning, the cultivation of a conducive learn-
ing environment, and the provision of emotional sus-
tenance;  4)  Classroom  Management  (CM)  refers  to
the maintenance of order, the organization of disrup-
tive elements, and the steering of classroom discourse.
bAr = frigj bArj
ri
Recognizing  that  these  pedagogical  behaviors
manifest  through  diverse  class  roles  (represented  as
 , with each  signifying a distinct role),
it is imperative to ensure the variety and breadth of
the agents’ roles within the educational setting.
Addressing the second concern, we emphasize the
necessity of meticulously and rhythmically orchestrat-
ing the interactions among the various agents within
the system, in harmony with the course content. We
introduce an innovative session controller designed to
regulate  the  flow  of  classroom  interactions,  contin-
gent  upon  the  class’s  dynamic  state  and  under  the
aegis of a central managerial agent[22].
Based on these principles, we design multiple class-
mate agents for diverse roles, implement class control,
and ultimately derive the multi-agent classroom process.
 3.3.2    Classmate Agents
To enhance the educational experience and emu-
 
Good question! ...
Interact with the Class Here ...
Teacher
Assistant
Classmate
(b)
User
Dialogue History
Class Roles
Assistant
Teacher
 Classmate(s)
 User
Manager
Current Slide
P36/58 
Who speaks
next? ...
(a)
From Single-Agent to Multi-Agent
Multi-Agent System
- What are Multi-Agent Systems?
- How to Understand These Systems?
Applications
- Social Simulation
- Software Development
- ...
Now Let's talk about LLM empowered multi-agent
systems. At the right side of the slide, we can see their
exciting applications in different fields. What's more, ...
I can't wait for the incredible future with these systems!
I heard that some behaviors emerge in these agents!
Wow, that sounds really interesting! As our classmate
said, are there any patterns similar to human groups?
 
Fig.4.  Illustration of the classroom learning environment of MAIC. (a) Course management. (b) Interactions in MAIC.
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 401

--- Page 10 ---
ai 2 A
A =  (LLM; prompt A) ;
A , bAr

PA
late the dynamics of traditional classroom settings, we
currently preset a variety of student-like agents, each
imbued  with  unique  personality  traits,  to  comple-
ment the teaching agents. These agents are designed
to  perform  roles  similar  to  those  of  peers,  enriching
the interactive landscape of the learning environment.
In this scholarly work, we introduce an initial set of
four  archetypal  student  agents,  while  also  providing
users with the flexibility to customize and introduce
additional  engaging  student  agents  onto  the  educa-
tional  platform.  Each  agent  is  facilitated
through prompting LLMs and associated with one or
more class roles, denoted as: 
 , where  is the role customization operation,
and  is  the  system  prompt  with  agent  descrip-
tion[44].

  Class Clown (TI, EC, CM). To spark creativity,
engender  a  lively  classroom  ambiance,  and  act  as  a
supportive peer, this agent also assists the teacher in
steering the class’s focus when the learner’s attention
wanders.

  Deep Thinker (TI, ID). It is designed to facili-
tate profound contemplation and to pose thought-pro-
voking questions that challenge and extend the intel-
lectual boundaries of the classroom.

  Note  Taker (TI,  CM).  With  a  penchant  for
summarizing and disseminating key points from class
discussions,  it  assists  in  cognitive  organization  and
the retention of information for all participants.

  Inquisitive Mind (TI, EC). Characterized by a
propensity for inquiring about lecture content, it fos-
ters a culture of inquiry and dialogue, prompting oth-
ers  to  engage  in  critical  thinking  and  collaborative
discourse.
Unlike Standardized Operating Procedures (SOPs)
commonly  used  in  multi-agent  systems[24, 46],  class-
room scenarios function as dynamic, interactive envi-
ronments  without  rigid  workflows,  resembling  an
evolving  group  discussion.  In  these  settings,  agents
must determine the appropriate timing for their inter-
actions, adapting to the fluid nature of classroom dis-
course.  To  address  this  need,  we  design  a  controller
that  observes  classroom  dynamics,  makes  informed
decisions, and manages agent behaviors based on the
current state of the class. The session controller is com-
posed of the class state receptor and the manager agent.
 3.3.3    Classroom Management
Class  State  Receptor. The  Class  State  Receptor
captures the ongoing classroom dialogue, with the his-
t
Ht = ∪(u
aj
i )t
ui
aj
au
St
St =
{
Pt; H tj bAr
}
Pt  P
t
tory up to time  represented as , where
  is the utterance made by agent  or a user (de-
noted as ). The class state  integrates this inter-
action  data,  structured  as .  Here,
  represents  the  learning  materials  covered  up
to time . This design prioritizes adaptability and re-
al-time  decision  making,  aligning  with  pedagogical
principles that emphasize responsiveness to the evolv-
ing needs of learners within an educational setting.
St
fL
fL : St ! f(at; ) jat 2 A; n ( g
n

Manager  Agent. MAIC  contains  a  hidden  meta-
agent responsible for regulating the dynamics of class-
room  interactions.  This  agent  receives  the  current
state of the class , monitors the flow of the class,
interprets ongoing activities, and determines the sub-
sequent  action  to  be  executed,  ensuring  that  the
learning  environment  remains  adaptive  and  respon-
sive. The task  of the Manager Agent can be for-
mally  defined  as ,
where  denotes a specific function and the selected
action  will  be  carried  out,  transitioning  the  class  to
the next state. After executing an action, the system
enters a waiting phase for a time window . During
this period, if a user responds or waiting time elapses,
the Manager Agent is triggered to make a new deci-
sion. This design reflects key educational principles by
prioritizing  a  learner-centered  approach,  maintaining
fluid  class  engagement,  and  promoting  timely  and
contextually  relevant  instructional  adjustments,
thereby enhancing the overall educational experience.
This classroom management method is the core of
MAIC's  learning  stage.  Currently,  we  collect  suffi-
cient interaction data and employ several foundation
models[47, 48] via fine-tuning or context engineering for
implementation.
 3.3.4    Cooperative Tasks with Peer Agents
N
We also implement a toy environment in which a
student collaborates with  AI peer agents to com-
plete a designed task by the course teacher. The task
is  divided  into  milestones,  issues,  defined  by  a  brief
instruction,  and  collaborative  agents  involved.  The
setup enforces accountable participation by assigning
clear ownership to the student and limiting unsolicit-
ed  assistance,  reducing  cognitive  offloading.  A  coun-
selor  agent  monitors  interactions  and  adaptively  ad-
justs scaffolding to match the student’s performance,
providing  guidance  without  removing  challenge.  To
cultivate real-world collaboration skills, agents reveal
only partial reasoning and execution states, prompt-
402 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1

--- Page 11 ---
ing  the  student  to  coordinate,  request  information,
and plan jointly rather than consume fully completed
outputs.
 4    Key Technique Evaluation
MAIC  is  a  complex  LLM-based  intelligent  agent
system that encompasses various specific technologies.
In line with our design targets, we evaluate the tech-
niques  along  two  axes:  scalability  and  adaptivity.
Specifically,  the  teaching  system  involves  multiple
processes  for  content  generation  and  knowledge  un-
derstanding,  while  on  the  learning  side,  it  requires
evaluating the effectiveness of agent construction and
classroom management capabilities. We focus on pre-
senting  two  core  functions:  lecture  script  generation
and  course  management,  which  are  fundamental  to
the teaching and learning aspects of MAIC. The eval-
uation of other technologies will be continuously up-
dated. Notably, these assessments provide only an ini-
tial view of specific aspects of MAIC and its effective-
ness in real-world practice will be further explored in
Section 5.
 4.1    Learning Material Generation
Evaluation
To validate MAIC-Craft’s core generation capabil-
ities, we evaluate the multimodal content understand-
ing and pedagogical synthesis technologies that pow-
er  our  Read-Generation  pipeline.  While  MAIC-Craft
extends beyond script generation to encompass com-
plete course creation, these foundational technologies
are essential for all generation stages.
 4.1.1    Experimental Setup
The  evaluation  task  is  to  automatically  generate
pedagogically  effective  lecture  scripts  from  presenta-
tion  slides,  where  the  system  must  process  multi-
modal slide content (text, images, diagrams) and pro-
duce  coherent  instructional  narratives  suitable  for
classroom  delivery.  We  assess  MAIC-Craft  using  20
diverse university presentations spanning STEM and
humanities  disciplines.  The  evaluation  compares  our
integrated  processing  approach  against  established
baselines:  1)  iterative  processing,  which  generates
scripts slide-by-slide without cross-page context, and
2) direct prompting, which applies basic multimodal
generation without pedagogical guidance.
 4.1.2    Evaluation Metrics
Following  established  evaluation  frameworks  in
educational  content  generation[17, 49],  we  assess  both
automated  and  human-judged  dimensions.  For  auto-
mated  evaluation,  we  measure:  1)  content  under-
standing (content), which measures how well the gen-
erated scripts accurately reflect and synthesize infor-
mation  from  the  presentation  slides;  2)  long-context
coherence (coherence), which assesses whether scripts
maintain narrative consistency and logical flow across
the  entire  presentation;  and  3)  pedagogical  design
(pedagogy),  which  evaluates  the  quality  of  instruc-
tional  tone,  clarity,  and  learner  engagement  in  the
generated  scripts.  For  human  evaluation,  drawing
from the Community of Inquiry framework[50], we as-
sess: 1) consistency— the factual accuracy and align-
ment  with  source  slide  content;  2)  readability— the
linguistic fluency and ease of comprehension; and 3)
coherence—the logical organization and smooth tran-
sitions between instructional segments.
 4.1.3    Results
As  shown  in Table 1,  MAIC-Craft  demonstrates
superior  performance  across  both  automated  metrics
(3.89  overall)  and  human  evaluation  rankings.  The
 
Table  1.    MAIC-Craft Core Technology Validation Results
Method Automated Evaluation Human Evaluation
Content Coherence Pedagogy Overall Consistency Readability Coherence
Iterative processing 3.68 3.72 3.75 3.72 1.47 1.48 1.31
Direct prompting 3.73 3.74 3.78 3.75 – – –
Teacher refined – – – – 2.12 2.16 2.25
MAIC-Craft 3.86 3.89 3.92 3.89 2.44 2.37 2.44
w/o visual 3.61 3.77 3.68 3.69 – – –
w/o context 3.84 3.66 3.84 3.78 – – –
Note: Automated scores (1–5 scale), human ranking (1–3 scale, the higher the better). “–” represents no evaluation conducted. Bold
scores represent the best performances.
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 403

--- Page 12 ---
human evaluation particularly validates MAIC-Craft’s
effectiveness,  with  consistently  higher  preference
scores  compared  with  iterative  processing  and  even
teacher-refined versions. Key findings are as follows.
● Multimodal  Understanding  Advantage.  MAIC-
Craft’s comprehensive processing significantly outper-
forms single-modality approaches, validating our inte-
gration strategy that addresses the requirement for di-
verse input format handling.
● Long-Context  Coherence.  Strong  coherence
scores  in  both  automated  (3.89)  and  human  evalua-
tion  (2.44)  demonstrate  MAIC-Craft’s  ability  to
maintain narrative consistency across extended educa-
tional  content,  directly  addressing  the  long-context
understanding challenges identified in MAIC-Craft.
● Pedagogical  Intelligence.  Superior  pedagogy
scores (3.92) and consistent human preference across
all dimensions confirm that MAIC-Craft’s structured
instructional design principles effectively enhance edu-
cational content quality beyond simple content gener-
ation, supporting our human-AI collaborative frame-
work approach.
These  results  validate  that  the  core  technologies
powering  MAIC-Craft’s  generation  stage  possess  the
fundamental capabilities required for high-quality ed-
ucational content creation across multiple modalities
and formats.
 4.2    Personalization Evaluation
In this subsection, we conduct expert evaluations
for  the  personalization  effectiveness  of  our  adaptive
engine.
 4.2.1    Data Construction
To  evaluate  the  personalization  capability  of  the
adaptive engine, we construct a dataset covering five
university-level courses across diverse disciplines: To-
wards Artificial General Intelligence (TAGI, comput-
er science), How to Study in University (HSU, educa-
tion),  Biology  (BIO,  natural  science),  Probability
Theory  and  Mathematical  Statistics  (PTMS,  mathe-
matics), and Psychology (PSY, psychology). For each
course,  we  extract  self-contained  instructional  seg-
ments from validated, human-authored curricula. To
simulate varied learner contexts, we generate synthet-
ic  yet  realistic  student  profiles  that  reflect  heteroge-
neous  academic  backgrounds  and  personal  interests,
validated  against  representative  university  enroll-
60
17 806
2 573
ment  distributions.  The  final  dataset  consists  of 
samples  with  words  and  retrieved  sup-
porting documents.
 4.2.2    Baselines
We benchmark our system’s personalized instruc-
tional  content  against  the  original  human-authored
materials. To disentangle the contributions of individ-
ual  components,  we  further  implement  two  ablation
settings:  1)  system-level  ablation,  where  the  back-
bone  model  is  evaluated  with  and  without  retrieval
augmentation to assess the role of external grounding;
2) model-level ablation, where the backbone LLM is
replaced with alternative foundation models (GPT-4o,
OpenAI-o1)  under  identical  retrieval  conditions,  to
examine the influence of model choice on personaliza-
tion quality.
 4.2.3    Human Evaluation
  0:8
We conduct a blind expert evaluation on the con-
structed  dataset.  Five  annotators  with  expertise  in
pedagogy  and  instructional  design  independently  as-
sess anonymized outputs along six pedagogical dimen-
sions:  instructional  accuracy,  expressive  clarity,  logi-
cal coherence, student engagement, linguistic natural-
ness,  and  personalization  relevance.  Each  sample  is
double-coded  by  two  reviewers,  yielding  high  inter-
rater reliability (Kendall’s ). We aggregate the
final  scores  in Table 2 to  compare  win-rates  across
conditions.
 4.2.4    Results
92:2
33:8
87:0
35:9
86:0
33:8
The  results  demonstrate  a  clear  pedagogical  ad-
vantage  of  personalization.  Compared  with  human-
authored  materials,  our  system  achieves  markedly
higher scores in learner-centered dimensions: personal-
ization relevance (  vs ) and student engage-
ment  (  vs ).  Notably,  annotators  also  pre-
ferred  the  system’s  linguistic  naturalness  (  vs
 ),  commenting  that  while  human  materials  are
accurate, they are often perceived as “dry” and “im-
personal”, whereas the personalized outputs integrate
analogies and contexts resonant with individual learn-
ers.
77:8 ! 53:7
Ablation  settings  further  confirm  these  findings.
Removing  retrieval  causes  sharp  declines  in  instruc-
tional  accuracy  ( )  and  expressive  clarity
404 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1

--- Page 13 ---
75:5 ! 53:0
( ),  underscoring  its  necessity  for  factual
grounding and clarity. Backbone substitution reveals
that model choice strongly influences affective dimen-
sions: while alternative retrieval-augmented baselines
perform reasonably, our chosen backbone consistent-
ly leads in engagement, naturalness, and relevance.
82:4
Overall,  our  system  attains  the  highest  score
( ),  validating  the  effectiveness  of  retrieval-aug-
mented  personalization  over  both  standardized  hu-
man materials and alternative system variants.
 4.3    Learning Side Evaluation
500
Classroom  Manager  Agent. Subsection 3.1.2 also
mentions several relevant techniques of MAIC learn-
ing. The classroom manager agent is the keypoint of
the classroom controlling. However, the evaluation of
this process is highly subjective, making it challeng-
ing to establish an objective scoring system for assess-
ment.  Therefore,  in  the  practical  implementation  of
the TAGI and HSU courses, we select  actual sys-
tem  decisions  and  extract  their  corresponding  class-
room scenarios. We recruit expert teachers and teach-
ing  assistants  to  manually  annotate  these  scenarios.
Based  on  this  annotated  data,  we  derive  the  results
shown in Fig.5. These results illustrate the alignment
between the actions chosen by the manager agent and
those  selected  by  human  instructors  in  determining
the  next  course  action.  Specifically,  we  evaluate  the
implementation with and without role description, de-
tecting the effects of contextual information.
 4.3.1    Results
Statistical  analysis  reveals  that  omitting  role  de-
scriptions  for  each  agent  reduces  the  classifier’s  per-
formance. Although the LLM can sometimes identify
the  correct  agent  by  referencing  partial  behaviors
from the chat history, the inclusion of comprehensive
role  descriptions  markedly  enhances  performance.
This suggests that while leveraging chat history as in-
put for the scene controller can provide some benefits,
it  is  insufficient  for  consistently  generating  accurate
outputs.
The current results, however, remain below opti-
mal  levels,  indicating  further  opportunities  to  en-
hance  the  user  experience.  Despite  the  suboptimal
performance,  interacting  agents  demonstrate  the  ca-
pacity  to  partially  offset  these  shortcomings.  This
compensatory  effect  is  due  to  the  LLM’s  ability  to
manage user queries beyond the predefined functions,
as  evidenced  by  our  subsequent  behavioral  study,
where user ratings do not significantly decline in the
ablation setting.
However,  enhancing  the  accuracy  of  the  con-
troller  agent  remains  advantageous  as  agents  can
more effectively manage the tasks they are designed
for.  For  example,  the  teacher  agent  is  tailored  to
adopt a softer, more instructive tone, but it may be
less  effective  in  handling  safety-related  cases  com-
pared with the assistant agent. Improved accuracy en-
sures  that  each  agent  operates  within  its  designed
scope,  contributing  to  a  more  seamless  and  effective
instructional process.
 5    Empirical Evaluation
To  explore  how  students  utilize  the  MAIC  plat-
form for learning and to evaluate the learning effec-
tiveness  within  an  authentic  educational  setting,  a
large-scale user study is conducted. Following ethical
approval  from  the  Tsinghua  University  Science  and
 
Table  2.    Expert Evaluation Across Six Pedagogical Dimensions
Method Ablation Acc (%) Cla (%) Coh (%) Eng (%) Nat (%) Rel (%) Overall (%)
Human-authored – 55.5 56.5 57.9 35.9 33.8 33.8 45.5
Ours – 77.8 75.5 76.2 87.0 86.0 92.2 82.4
w/o retrieval System 53.7 53.0 53.4 67.3 69.0 65.7 60.3
GPT-4o Model 55.9 56.8 57.2 55.8 54.1 54.8 55.9
OpenAI-o1 Model 57.1 58.2 55.2 54.0 57.1 53.4 55.8
Note:  Acc:  accuracy,  Cla:  clarity,  Coh:  coherence,  Eng:  engagement,  Nat:  naturalness,  Rel:  relevance.  We  compare  our  system
against human-authored content and show two ablation settings: 1) system-level (w/o retrieval augmentation) and 2) model-level
(LLM backbones with retrieval augmentation). Bold scores represent the best performances and the underlined ones indicate the
second best performances.
 
40 50 60 70 80 90
Precision
Manager Agent
w/o Description
TAGI
HSU
Overall
 
Fig.5.  Manager agent precision.
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 405

--- Page 14 ---
Technology Ethics Committee (Certificate No: THU-
04-2024-56),  we  implement  a  two-month  experimen-
tal  intervention  within  the  course  Towards  General
Artificial  Intelligence  (TGAI).  While  over  500  stu-
dents initially registered, a total of 319 students ulti-
mately completed the course within the study period.
This  investigation  aims  to  address  three  core  re-
search  objectives:  1)  to  characterize  student  engage-
ment patterns during course learning and human-AI
interactions,  and  2)  to  determine  the  learning  out-
comes  achieved  by  students  following  the  MAIC  in-
tervention, and 3) to evaluate the quality of the AI-
generated  instruction  and  interaction  on  the  MAIC
platform. Preliminary observations derived from this
study are detailed in the subsequent subsections. Due
to  the  page  limitation,  we  report  detailed  results  of
the quality of the AI-generated instruction and inter-
action on the MAIC platform in the Appendix⑧.
 5.1    Student Engagement in MAIC
Analyzing the log data enabled us to further in-
vestigate  students’ engagement  in  the  MAIC  course
and their interaction dynamics with the multiple AI
agents. The results revealed a clear divergence in stu-
dent approach: among all the students who successful-
ly completed the entire course (N = 319), 13.7% pri-
marily  adopted  an “observational  mode”,  while  the
vast  majority  (86.3%)  actively  engaged  in  interac-
tions with the various AI agents.
5:24
SD = 6:62
21:28
SD = 16:94
Subsequent qualitative data gathered through stu-
dent interviews offered insight into these distinct ap-
proaches.  Students  who  adopted  the  observational
mode indicated that they were able to smoothly fol-
low  the  AI  instructor’s  explanations  without  cogni-
tive interruption. They specifically reported that this
approach facilitated “uninterrupted thinking” and re-
sulted in “a more cohesive learning experience”. For
students who actively chose the interactive mode, the
average  number  of  messages  sent  per  student  per
module was  ( ), with an average mes-
sage length of  Chinese characters ( ).
Qualitatively,  these  interactive  students  described
their  experience  as  gaining “a  supportive  environ-
ment for self-expression”, where they felt “zero pres-
sure to ask questions and receive immediate feedback
from  different  perspectives”,  highlighting  the  per-
ceived benefits of the interactive setting for personal-
ized inquiry.
11
To  comprehensively  unfold  students’ interaction
with  multiple  AI  agents,  we  systematically  catego-
rized  and  consolidated  student  activities  into  seven
distinct activity types, which are visually represented
in Fig.6.  These  categories  include  asking  questions,
initiating ideas, responding to AI’s questions, negoti-
ating  and  verifying,  regulating  AI  roles,  regulating
class process, and sharing emotion. Notably, the be-
haviors of asking questions and initiating ideas were
the most prevalent, accounting for 79% of all record-
ed  activities.  Furthermore,  it  is  important  to  note
that some students managed and controlled different
intelligent  agent  roles  and  the  class  progress.  These
management-related  behaviors  account  for %
(Fig.6), for example, “Please go back to the previous
slide” or “Please  explain  that  in  simpler  terms”,
demonstrating  strong  autonomy  and  self-regulated
learning abilities. In the interviews, some students al-
so mentioned, “I don’t just ask for knowledge; I might
ask, I want to learn more, or I hope to explore some-
thing new in a certain field, to manage and regulate
the AI’s responses.”
  
Student Activity Type
Regulating Classmates
Initiating Ideas
Negotiating and Verifying
Asking Questions
Sharing Emotions
Responding
Regulating Process 
1.5% 18.1%
0.7%
9.6%
5.3%
3.9%
60.9%
 
Fig.6.  Ratios of student activities.
 
Overall, the high level of proactive questioning in-
dicates that students are eager to engage when given
the  opportunity,  underscoring  the  importance  of  de-
signing AI tools that foster inquiry-based learning[51].
Questioning is an important behavior that reflects ac-
tive  learning  in  students,  which  ultimately  leads  to
better academic performance. Finally, the occurrence
of  management-related  behaviors  suggests  that  stu-
dents  already  realize  their  active  role  in  their  learn-
ing process, which align with previous study[52].
 5.2    Learning Outcomes in MAIC
Students’ learning outcomes on the MAIC cours-
406 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1
 ⑧https://jcst.ict.ac.cn/en/supplement/c2f85ed8-5f28-4a37-a5ea-ffdf4a3a9ac4, Jan. 2026.

--- Page 15 ---
es  were  evaluated  from  three  perspectives:  learning
performance  (the  baseline  test,  performance  in  mod-
ule  tests  and  final  course  test),  technology  accep-
tance through questionnaires, and self-reported high-
er-order thinking scores.
Test Results. The baseline test was conducted one
day  prior  to  the  course,  consisting  of  10  multiple-
choice questions. Module tests were conducted at the
end  of  each  module,  focusing  primarily  on  the  con-
tent covered in the module. Each module test consist-
ed of 10 multiple-choice questions. All the test items
were created by the course teacher and teaching assis-
tants. The correlation analysis showed that test scores
are strongly associated with class engagement. Specifi-
cally,  the  frequency  (measured  by  the  logarithm  of
the  number  of  messages  per  module MsgNum)  and
length of in-class chat messages (measured by the log-
arithm of the number of characters per message and
module MsgLen)  sent  by  students,  prominent  fea-
tures of the MAIC system, were positively correlated
with standardized module test scores, as presented in
Table 3.
  
Table  3.    Correlation of Students’ Message-Aware Behaviors
and Test Results
(log(M sgN um))
 
(log(M sgLen)) 
AvgQuiz 0.341*** 0.202*
FinalExam 0.346*** 0.333**
Note: Values shown in the table are normalized.
 
 =
0:14
p = 0:021
A regression analysis on students’ average module
test  scores  was  performed,  controlling  normalized
scores of the baseline test as the covariate. As Table 4
shows,  the  average  message  length  (AvgMsgLen)  is
found to be a significant predictor of the final exam
performance ( , ).
  
Table  4.    Regression Results of Final Exam on the Length of
Messages

 SE 95% CI
t 
p 
(Constant) 25 .46 [19.13 31.79] 8.02 <0.001
AvgMsgLen 0 .14 0.25 [0.02 0.26] 2.36 0.021
Baseline 2 .02 0.43 [1.46 3.36] 4.05 <0.001
Note: SE: standard error. CI: confidence interval.
 
N = 111
t = 3:05
p = 0:002
t = 2:81
p = 0:005
t = 3:98
p < 0:001
Technology  Acceptance. We  also  evaluate  stu-
dents’ attitude  changes  towards  generative  AI  tools
before and after the course. The results demonstrated
a  significant  increase  in  technology  acceptance
( , , ).  Further  analysis  of
specific dimensions of acceptance revealed significant
improvements in habit ( , ), effort ex-
pectancy ( , ), and facilitating condi-
t = 3:22
p = 0:002
tions  ( , ).  These  findings  indicate
that the immersive learning experience on the MAIC
platform successfully facilitates the development of a
positive and constructive attitude towards the use of
generative AI tools. Interview responses also reflect an
enhanced  understanding  and  acceptance  of  AI  tech-
nologies. One student remarked: “I used to be quite
resistant to AI, mainly because it was too complicat-
ed, but after this course, I found that it was not that
complicated. I learned some of its principles.”
t = 2:32
p = 0:02
t = 2:37
p = 0:02
High-Order  Thinking.  We  explore  the  perceived
impact of taking the TAGI course on the MAIC plat-
form on students’ higher-order thinking skills by com-
paring  student  responses  from  pre- and  post-course
questionnaires.  The  results  of  paired-sample t-tests
showed  significant  increases  in  students’ perceptions
of the course’s positive effects on both abstract think-
ing  ( , )  and  critical  thinking
( , ). These findings suggest that stu-
dents perceived the learning experience on the MAIC
platform  as  an  enhancement  to  their  higher-order
thinking capabilities.
Interviews  further  illuminated  these  perceptions.
One student stated: “I think it might make me more
confident in asking these questions and think more. I
also  approach  problems  from  multiple  perspectives,
although I won’t completely accept what the AI says;
I always think about it more.”
Few students articulated a noticeable deficiency in
opportunities  for  deep,  substantive  discussion  within
the course structure. For instance, one student com-
mented on the limitations compared with a tradition-
al setting: “(In a real classroom) After class, I can ask
the  teacher  to  explain  it  to  me  again.  Teachers  will
directly tell me whether my question is correct, valu-
able, or not, based on their understanding. The teach-
er’s  questions  can  challenge  my  ingrained  cognition
and  help  me  break  my  own  limitations,  but  the  AI
teacher and AI classmates in this course do not seem
capable of doing that”.
This  student  further  criticized  the  focus  of  the
content: “This  course  is  purely  about  knowledge  or
concepts  because  the  teacher’s  teaching  is  quite  me-
chanical. The course is rich in theoretical knowledge,
but there is almost no ‘life thinking’, ‘life enlighten-
ment’, or any philosophical reflections outside of arti-
ficial intelligence.”
Both  quantitative  and  qualitative  observations
collectively  suggest  that  while  students  broadly  ac-
knowledge  the  MAIC  platform’s  potential  to  foster
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 407

--- Page 16 ---
abstract and critical thinking, it may not have fully
facilitated the deep, challenging, and personally rele-
vant  intellectual  engagement  needed  to  promote  all
aspects  of  higher-order  thought.  Therefore,  future
work will focus on integrating more advanced cogni-
tive  strategies  into  the  agents’ design  and  introduc-
ing more complex problem-solving scenarios and chal-
lenging content to better support the development of
higher-order thinking.
 6    Future Work
Building upon the foundational framework of MA-
IC, several critical directions warrant further investi-
gation  to  advance  the  integration  of  AI  and  educa-
tional theory.
First,  future  work  should  consider  developing
LLMs that are not only technically proficient but al-
so deeply grounded in established pedagogical princi-
ples and cognitive science. This entails constructing a
domain-specific foundational model for education-one
that  internalizes  curricular  structures,  learning  pro-
gressions,  knowledge  states  and  cognitive  load  theo-
ry— thereby  enabling  the  generation  of  learning  re-
sources that are both instructionally sound and cogni-
tively  optimized.  Specifically,  course  plans  generated
by MAIC-Craft could be more well-aligned with peda-
gogical  principles,  with  less  hallucinations  and  more
Socratic  educational  practice  designs.  It  would  serve
as a unified and an education-centric knowledge base,
ensuring fidelity to learning objectives while support-
ing adaptive content delivery.
Second,  there  are  also  sufficient  needs  about  en-
riching  collaborative  learning  environments  through
more sophisticated multi-agent simulations. Specifical-
ly, we will extend MAIC to support dynamic team in-
teractions with different roles in project-based learn-
ing,  where  AI  agents  not  only  build  task  execution,
but also model metacognitive strategies, social regula-
tion,  and  epistemic  discourse.  It  requires  advancing
human-centered  agent  design,  where  agents  act  not
merely as tools, but also as responsive, socially aware
collaborators that adapt to the evolving needs, group
dynamics, and affective states of learners.
Third, from a pedagogical perspective, we plan to
continually investigate the co-learning trajectories and
outcomes  in  a  multi-agent  classroom  as  well  as  the
abovementioned MAIC-PBL. Meanwhile, with the ex-
panding breadth of courses and topics, learning objec-
tives steadily increase, where we aim to analyze the
learning  style  and  outcomes  of  students  in  solving
complex problem or projects.
Finally,  a  long-term  vision  involves  aligning  AI
more  closely  with  biological  and  human  intelligence.
It includes exploring brain-inspired architectures that
mirror human memory, attention, and reasoning pro-
cesses,  and  leveraging  such  insights  to  design  multi-
agent  systems  with  fine-grained  cognitive  fidelity.
Building human-like agents at a behavioral level, we
aspire to create AI-augmented classrooms that do not
just simulate teaching, but also authentically emulate
the nuanced, empathetic, and adaptive nature of hu-
man instruction.
 7    Predicted Impact
The implementation of MAIC in online education
is expected to revolutionize the learning experience by
enhancing both scalability and adaptability. By lever-
aging  multi-agent  systems,  MAIC  can  dynamically
adjust  to  the  needs  of  individual  learners,  providing
personalized  learning  paths  that  were  previously
unattainable  in  traditional  MOOCs.  This  personal-
ized  approach  not  only  improves  learning  outcomes
but  also  provides  access  to  high-quality  education
across  diverse  socio-economic  backgrounds,  as  it  re-
duces the dependency on human instructors for con-
tent delivery.
Moreover, MAIC is anticipated to address some of
the  inherent  challenges  of  traditional  online  educa-
tion, such as the one-size-fits-all model and the lack of
real-time  adaptability[53].  The  integration  of  AI-driv-
en agents as teachers, teaching assistants, and class-
mates creates a more interactive and responsive learn-
ing  environment.  This  shift  promises  to  increase  en-
gagement and motivation among students, potential-
ly leading to higher completion rates and deeper un-
derstanding of the material.
However, it is crucial to acknowledge that the in-
troduction of such a transformative system could also
have  unintended  consequences.  There  may  be  a
widening gap between students who adapt well to AI-
powered learning environments and those who strug-
gle  with  this  new  mode  of  education.  Additionally,
the reliance on AI systems could lead to reduced op-
portunities  for  human  instructors,  potentially  dimin-
ishing  the  role  of  educators  in  the  learning  process.
These impacts need to be carefully monitored and ad-
408 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1

--- Page 17 ---
dressed through ongoing evaluation and refinement of
the MAIC system.
 8    Conclusions
In this paper, we provided a concise overview of
the  development  trajectory  of  online  education  and
technological  opportunities  that  arise  in  the  era  of
large language models (LLMs). Considering the prin-
ciples of adaptivity and scalability, along with the so-
phisticated  design  of  LLM-driven  multi-agent  sys-
tems, we explored how existing MOOC can be trans-
formed into MAIC (Massive AI-Empowered Courses)
and  discussed  new  paradigms  of  teaching  and  learn-
ing. We proposed a comprehensive solution, analyzed
key technical components, and implemented each step
of  the  process.  Our  approaches  are  practically  de-
ployed in several courses at Tsinghua University, Bei-
jing, leading to a series of preliminary observations of
student  behavior.  These  initial  findings  suggest  that
highly personalized classrooms built with new AI-as-
sisted learning technologies can achieve high quality,
and  student  behaviors  demonstrate  the  effectiveness
of the teaching process.
 Acknowledgements    We give the greatest ap-
preciation  to  Yisi  Zhan  for  practicing  her  course
“How to Study in the University” on MAIC. We sin-
cerely thank Jie Cao, Ruimiao Li, Letian Ma, Jiaxin
Fan, Yang Dang, Yongqi Li, and Zhaochun Wen for
their full and commited support for educational data
collections and analysis. We thank Yuanchun Wang,
Hanming Li for toolkit development. We thank Nan
Zhang,  Ruixin  Ni,  Zehang  Li,  Yuqiu  Liu,  Yanpeng
Wang, and Danqi Zheng for their outstanding project
management,  coordination,  engineering  implementa-
tion, and product design.
 Conflict of Interest    The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.
References 
 Ng A. The online revolution: Education for everyone. In
Proc. the  22nd  ACM  International  Conference  on  Infor-
mation & Knowledge Management, Oct. 27–Nov. 1, 2013,
pp.1913–1914. DOI: 10.1145/2505515.2514698.
[1]
 Fröbel F. The Education of Man. D. Appleton and Com-
pany, 1887.
[2]
 Halstead M, Taylor M J. Values in Education and Educa-
tion  in  Values.  Routledge,  2005.  DOI: 10.4324/
9780203973554.
[3]
 Daniel J. Making sense of MOOCs: Musings in a maze of
myth, paradox and possibility. Journal of Interactive Me-
dia in Education, 2012, 2012(3): Article No. 18. DOI: 10.
5334/2012-18.
[4]
 Pappano  L. The  year  of  the  MOOC. The  New  York
Times, 2012, 2(12): 2012.
[5]
 Papadakis S. MOOCs 2012-2022: An overview. Advances
in  Mobile  Learning  Educational  Research , 2023, 3(1):
682–693. DOI: 10.25082/AMLER.2023.01.017.
[6]
 Reich  J,  Ruipérez-Valiente  J  A. The  MOOC  pivot. Sci-
ence, 2019, 363(6423): 130–131. DOI: 10.1126/science.
aav7958.
[7]
 Reich  J. Rebooting  MOOC  research. Science, 2015,
347(6217): 34–35. DOI: 10.1126/science.1261627.
[8]
 Zhu M, Sari A R, Lee M M. A comprehensive systematic
review  of  MOOC  research:  Research  techniques,  topics,
and  trends  from  2009  to  2019. Educational  Technology
Research and Development, 2020, 68(4): 1685–1710. DOI:
10.1007/s11423-020-09798-x.
[9]
 Nabizadeh  A  H,  Leal  J  P,  Rafsanjani  H  N,  Shah  R  R.
Learning path personalization and recommendation meth-
ods: A survey of the state-of-the-art. Expert Systems with
Applications, 2020, 159: 113596. DOI: 10.1016/j.eswa.
2020.113596.
[10]
 Zhong Q, Yu J, Zhang Z, Mao Y, Wang Y, Lin Y, Hou L,
Li J, Tang J. Towards a general pre-training framework
for adaptive learning in MOOCs. arXiv: 2208.04708, 2022.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.04708, Feb. 2026.
[11]
 Jiang W, Pardos Z A, Wei Q. Goal-based course recom-
mendation. In Proc. the 9th International Conference on 
Learning  Analytics  &  Knowledge,  Mar.  2019,  pp.36–45.
DOI: 10.1145/3303772.3303814.
[12]
 Zhang  H,  Huang  T,  Lv  Z,  Liu  S,  Zhou  Z. MCRS:  A
course  recommendation  system  for  MOOCs. Multimedia
Tools and Applications, 2018, 77(6): 7051–7069. DOI: 10.
1007/s11042-017-4620-2.
[13]
 Jing X, Tang J. Guess you like: Course recommendation
in MOOCs. In Proc. the International Conference on Web
Intelligence,  Aug.  2017,  pp.783–789.  DOI: 10.1145/
3106426.3106478.
[14]
 Yilmaz R, Yurdugül H, Yilmaz F G K, Şahin M, Sulak S,
Aydin F, Tepgeç M, Müftüoğlu C T, Oral Ö. Smart MOOC
integrated  with  intelligent  tutoring:  A  system  architec-
ture and framework model proposal. Computers and Edu-
cation:  Artificial  Intelligence, 2022, 3: 100092. DOI: 10.
1016/j.caeai.2022.100092.
[15]
 Tu S, Zhang Z, Yu J, Li C, Zhang S, Yao Z, Hou L, Li J.
LittleMu:  Deploying  an  online  virtual  teaching  assistant
via heterogeneous sources integration and chain of teach
prompts.  In Proc. the  32nd  ACM  International  Confer-
ence  on  Information  and  Knowledge  Management,  Oct.
2023, pp.4843–4849. DOI: 10.1145/3583780.3615484.
[16]
 Kabudi  T,  Pappas  I,  Olsen  D  H. AI-enabled  adaptive
learning systems: A systematic mapping of the literature.
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence , 2021, 2:
100017. DOI: 10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100017.
[17]
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 409

--- Page 18 ---
 Epstein  Z,  Hertzmann  A,  The  Investigators  of  Human
Creativity. Art and the science of generative AI. Science,
2023, 380(6650): 1110–1111. DOI: 10.1126/science.
adh4451.
[18]
 OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv: 2303.08774, 2023.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774, Feb. 2026.
[19]
 Touvron H, Lavril T, Izacard G, Martinet X, Lachaux M
A, Lacroix T, Rozière B, Goyal N, Hambro E, Azhar F,
Rodriguez  A,  Joulin  A,  Grave  E,  Lample  G.  LLaMA:
Open  and  efficient  foundation  language  models.  arXiv:
2302.13971, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971, Feb.
2026.
[20]
 Chen W, Su Y, Zuo J, Yang C, Yuan C, Qian C, Chan C
M, Qin Y, Lu Y, Xie R, Liu Z, Sun M, Zhou J. Agent-
Verse:  Facilitating  multi-agent  collaboration  and  explor-
ing  emergent  behaviors  in  agents.  arXiv:  2308.10848v1,
2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10848v1, Feb. 2026.
[21]
 Wu Q, Bansal G, Zhang J, Wu Y, Zhang S, Zhu E, Li B,
Jiang L, Zhang X, Wang C. AutoGen: Enabling next-gen
LLM  applications  via  multi-agent  conversation  frame-
work.  arXiv:  2308.08155v1,  2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2308.08155v1, Feb. 2026.
[22]
 Park J S, O’Brien J, Cai C J, Morris M R, Liang P, Bern-
stein M S. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of hu-
man  behavior.  In Proc. the  36th  Annual  ACM  Sympo-
sium  on  User  Interface  Software  and  Technology,  Oct.
29–Nov.  1,  2023,  Article  No.  2.  DOI: 10.1145/3586183.
3606763.
[23]
 Qian C, Cong X, Liu, Yang C, Chen W, Su Y, Dang Y,
Li J, Xu J, Li D, Liu Z, Sun M. Communicative agents
for  software  development.  arXiv:  2307.07924v4,  2023.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.07924v4, Feb. 2026.
[24]
 Yu J, Wang Y, Zhong Q, Luo G, Mao Y, Sun K, Feng
W, Xu W, Cao S, Zeng K, Yao Z, Hou L, Lin Y, Li P,
Zhou  J,  Xu  B,  Li  J,  Tang  J,  Sun  M.  MOOCCubeX:  A
large knowledge-centered repository for adaptive learning
in MOOCs. In Proc. the 30th ACM International Confer-
ence  on  Information  &  Knowledge  Management,  Nov.
2021, pp.4643–4652. DOI: 10.1145/3459637.3482010.
[25]
 Pal  Chowdhury  S,  Zouhar  V,  Sachan  M.  AutoTutor
meets  large  language  models:  A  language  model  tutor
with  rich  pedagogy  and  guardrails.  In Proc. the  11th
ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale, Jul. 2024, pp.5–15.
DOI: 10.1145/3657604.3662041.
[26]
 Nwana  H  S. Intelligent  tutoring  systems:  An  overview.
Artificial  Intelligence  Review, 1990, 4(4): 251–277. DOI:
10.1007/BF00168958.
[27]
 Hexter J H. The education of the aristocracy in the re-
naissance. The  Journal  of  Modern  History, 1950, 22(1):
1–20. DOI: 10.1086/237314.
[28]
 Giroux  H  A,  Penna  A  N. Social  education  in  the  class-
room: The dynamics of the hidden curriculum. Theory &
Research in Social Education, 1979, 7(1): 21–42. DOI: 10.
1080/00933104.1979.10506048.
[29]
 Dang F, Tang J, Li S. MOOC-KG: A MOOC knowledge
graph  for  cross-platform  online  learning  resources.  In
[30]
Proc. the 9th International Conference on Electronics In-
formation and Emergency Communication (ICEIEC), Jul.
2019. DOI: 10.1109/ICEIEC.2019.8784572.
 Brockfeld T, Müller B, de Laffolie J. Video versus live lec-
ture  courses:  A  comparative  evaluation  of  lecture  types
and  results. Medical  Education  Online , 2018, 23(1):
1555434. DOI: 10.1080/10872981.2018.1555434.
[31]
 Mislevy R J, Gitomer D H. The role of probability-based
inference in an intelligent tutoring system. User Modeling
and  User-Adapted  Interaction, 1995, 5(3/4): 253–282.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01126112.
[32]
 Aleven  V.  Rule-based  cognitive  modeling  for  intelligent
tutoring systems. In Advances in Intelligent Tutoring Sys-
tems,  Nkambou  R,  Bourdeau  J,  Mizoguchi  R  (eds.),
Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp.33–62. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-
14363-2_3.
[33]
 Cui W, Xiao Y, Wang H, Song Y, Hwang S W, Wang W.
KBQA:  Learning  question  answering  over  QA  corpora
and knowledge bases. Proceedings of the VLDB Endow-
ment, 2017, 10(5): 565–576. DOI: 10.14778/3055540.
3055549.
[34]
 Carey  T  A,  Mullan  R  J. What  is  Socratic  questioning?
Psychotherapy:  Theory,  Research,  Practice,  Training ,
2004, 41(3): 217–226. DOI: 10.1037/0033-3204.41.3.217.
[35]
 Nye B D, Graesser A C, Hu X. AutoTutor and family: A
review of 17 years of natural language tutoring. Interna-
tional Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 2014,
24(4): 427–469. DOI: 10.1007/s40593-014-0029-5.
[36]
 Schultz K, Bratt E O, Clark B, Peters S, Pon-Barry H,
Treeratpituk P. A scalable, reusable spoken conversation-
al tutor: SCoT. In Proc. the AIED 2003 Workshop on Tu-
torial Dialogue Systems: With a View Toward the Class-
room, Jul. 2003, pp.367–377.
[37]
 Jiang L, Hu S, Huang M, Wang Z, Yang J, Ye X, Zheng
W.  MAssistant:  A  personal  knowledge  assistant  for
MOOC learners. In Proc. the 2019 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th 
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP): System Demonstrations, Nov.
2019, pp.133–138. DOI: 10.18653/v1/D19-3023.
[38]
 Meijer R R, Nering M L. Computerized adaptive testing:
Overview  and  introduction. Applied  Psychological  Mea-
surement, 1999, 23(3): 187–194. DOI: 10.1177/
01466219922031310.
[39]
 Piech  C,  Bassen  J,  Huang  J,  Ganguli  S,  Sahami  M,
Guibas  L,  Sohl-Dickstein  J.  Deep  knowledge  tracing.  In
Proc. the 29th International Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , Dec. 2015, pp.505–513. DOI:
10.5555/2969239.2969296.
[40]
 Wang  F,  Liu  Q,  Chen  E,  Huang  Z,  Chen  Y,  Yin  Y,
Huang Z, Wang S. Neural cognitive diagnosis for intelli-
gent education systems. In Proc. the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Feb. 2020, pp.6153–6161. DOI: 10.
1609/aaai.v34i04.6080.
[41]
 Dan Y, Lei Z, Gu Y, Li Y, Yin J, Lin J, Ye L, Tie Z,
Zhou Y, Wang Y, Zhou A, Zhou Z, Chen Q, Zhou J, He
[42]
410 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1

--- Page 19 ---
L, Qiu X. EduChat: A large-scale language model-based
chatbot  system  for  intelligent  education.  arXiv:
2308.02773, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.02773, Feb.
2026.
 Li  H,  Yu  J,  Ouyang  Y,  Liu  Z,  Rong  W,  Liu  H,  Li  J,
Xiong  Z. Explainable  few-shot  knowledge  tracing. Fron-
tiers  of  Digital  Education, 2025, 2(4):  Article  No. 34.
DOI: 10.1007/s44366-025-0071-x.
[43]
 Zhang  Z,  Zhang-Li  D,  Yu  J,  Gong  L,  Zhou  J,  Hao  Z,
Jiang  J,  Cao  J,  Liu  H,  Liu  Z,  Hou  L,  Li  J.  Simulating
classroom  education  with  LLM-empowered  agents.  In
Proc. the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas 
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: 
Human  Language  Technologies ,  Apr.  2025,  pp.10364–
10379. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-long.520.
[44]
 Schwanke D. Classroom interaction research: A survey of
recent  literature. The  Journal  of  Classroom  Interaction,
1981, 16(2): 8–10.
[45]
 Hong S, Zheng X, Chen J, Cheng Y, Wang J, Zhang C,
Wang Z, Yau S K S, Lin Z, Zhou L, Ran C, Xiao L, Wu
C. MetaGPT: Meta programming for multi-agent collabo-
rative framework. arXiv: 2308.00352v4, 2023. https://arx-
iv.org/abs/2308.00352v4. Feb. 2026.
[46]
 Hu  S,  Tu  Y,  Han  X,  He  C,  Cui  G,  Long  X,  Zheng  Z,
Fang Y, Huang Y, Zhao W, Zhang X, Thai Z, Zhang K,
Wang C, Yao Y, Zhao C, Zhou J, Cai J, Zhai Z, Ding N,
Jia C, Zeng G, Li D, Liu Z, Sun M. MiniCPM: Unveiling
the potential of small language models with scalable train-
ing strategies. arXiv: 2404.06395, 2024. https://arxiv.org/
abs/2404.06395, Feb. 2026.
[47]
 Team GLM. ChatGLM: A family of large language mod-
els from GLM-130B to GLM-4 all tools. arXiv: 2406.12793,
2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12793, Feb. 2026.
[48]
 Kurdi G, Leo J, Parsia B, Sattler U, Al-Emari S. A sys-
tematic review of automatic question generation for edu-
cational purposes. International Journal of Artificial Intel-
ligence in Education, 2020, 30(1): 121–204. DOI: 10.1007/
s40593-019-00186-y.
[49]
 Garrison D R, Arbaugh J B. Researching the community
of  inquiry  framework:  Review,  issues,  and  future  direc-
tions. The  Internet  and  Higher  Education, 2007, 10(3):
157–172. DOI: 10.1016/j.iheduc.2007.04.001.
[50]
 Xie X. Influence of AI-driven inquiry teaching on learn-
ing  outcomes. International  Journal  of  Emerging  Tech-
nologies in Learning (iJET), 2023, 18(23): 59–70. DOI: 10.
3991/ijet.v18i23.45473.
[51]
 Cain W. Prompting change: Exploring prompt engineer-
ing in large language model AI and its potential to trans-
form education. TechTrends, 2024, 68(1): 47–57. DOI: 10.
1007/s11528-023-00896-0.
[52]
 Rizvi S, Rienties B, Rogaten J, Kizilcec R F. Beyond one-
size-fits-all  in  MOOCs:  Variation  in  learning  design  and
persistence of learners in different cultural and socioeco-
nomic  contexts. Computers  in  Human  Behavior, 2022,
126: 106973. DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2021.106973.
[53]
Ji-Fan Yu received his B.E. degree
in  software  engineering  from  Beihang
University,  Beijing,  in  2018,  and  his
Ph.D. degree in computer science and
technology  from  Tsinghua  University,
Beijing, in 2024. He currently works at
Tsinghua  University’s  School  of  Edu-
cation, where his research is on artificial intelligence in
education.
Daniel  Zhang-Li received  his  B.E.
and M.S. degrees in computer science
and technology from Tsinghua Univer-
sity, Beijing, in 2021 and 2023, respec-
tively. He is currently a Ph.D. candi-
date in computer science and technolo-
gy  at  Tsinghua  University.  His  re-
search interest lies in large language models and applica-
tion agents.
Zhe-Yuan  Zhang received  his  LLB
degree  in  philosophy,  politics,  and
economy, and his M.S. degree in com-
puter science and technology from Ts-
inghua University, Beiing, in 2022 and
2025,  respectively.  He  is  currently  a
Ph.D. student at Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity, Pittsburgh. His research focuses on human-agent
interaction.
Yu-Cheng  Wang received  his  B.E.
degree in computer science from Zhe-
jiang  University,  Hangzhou,  in  2020.
He  is  currently  a  master  student  in
the  Knowledge  Engineering  Group  at
Tsinghua  University’s  Department  of
Computer  Science  and  Technology,
Beijing. His research focuses on artificial intelligence in
education.
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 411

--- Page 20 ---
Hao-Xuan Li received his B.E. and
M.S. degrees at the School of Comput-
er  Science  and  Technology  from  Bei-
hang University, Beijing, in 2022 and
2025,  respectively.  He  is  currently  a
first-year Ph.D. candidate at the Col-
lege  of  AI,  Tsinghua  University,  Bei-
jing. His research focuses on cognitive science and AI for
education.
Joy Jia Yin Lim received her B.E.
degree  in  computer  science  and  tech-
nology from Tsinghua University, Bei-
jing, in 2023. She is currently a mas-
ter  student  at  the  Department  of
Computer  Science  and  Technology,
Tsinghua  University,  Beijing.  Her  re-
search focuses on large language models and their appli-
cations in education.
Zhan-Xin  Hao received  her  B.Ed.
degree in education from Beijing Nor-
mal  University,  Beijing,  her  M.A  de-
gree  in  educational  assessment  from
University  College  London,  London,
and  her  Ph.D.  degree  in  educational
assessment from the University of Ox-
ford,  Oxford.  She  is  currently  a  postdoctoral  fellow  at
Tsinghua  University’s  School  of  Education,  where  her
research focuses on artificial intelligence in education.
Shang-Qing  Tu received  his  B.E.
degree  in  computer  science  and  tech-
nology  from  Beihang  University,  Bei-
jing, in 2022. He is currently a Ph.D.
student  at  the  Department  of  Com-
puter  Science  and  Technology,  Ts-
inghua  University,  Beijing.  His  re-
search focuses on large language models and their appli-
cations in education.
Lu Zhang received her B.S. degree
in  geophysics  from  Tongji  University,
Shanghai,  in  2021.  She  is  currently  a
master student at the School of Edu-
cation,  Tsinghua  University,  Beijing.
Her  research  interests  focus  on  the
practical applications of generative ar-
tificial intelligence in teaching and learning, with a par-
ticular  emphasis  on  AI-enabled  innovative  pedagogical
models and their implications for AI in education.
Xu-Sheng Dai received his B.S. de-
gree in economics from the University
of New South Whale, Sydney, in 2023.
He  is  currently  a  master  student  at
the  School  of  Education,  Tsinghua
University, Beijing. His research inter-
ests focus on paradigmatic innovation
of  pedagogy  leveraged  by  generative  artificial  intelli-
gence.
Jian-Xiao  Jiang received  his  B.E.
degree  in  computer  science  and  tech-
nology from the Department of Com-
puter  Science  and  Technology,  Ts-
inghua University, Beijing, in 2023. He
is  currently  a  master  student  at  the
School of Education, Tsinghua Univer-
sity,  Beijing.  His  research  leverages  educational  data
mining and generative AI to rigorously evaluate and ad-
vance AIED innovations.
Shen Yang is currently a senior un-
dergraduate  student  at  the  Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Tech-
nology,  Tsinghua  University,  Beijing.
His  research  focuses  on  the  applica-
tion  of  large  language  models  and
agents in education.
412 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1

--- Page 21 ---
Fei  Qin received  her  Ph.D.  degree
in educational economics and manage-
ment  from  the  School  of  Education,
Tsinghua  University,  Beijing,  and  is
currently a postdoctoral fellow at the
School of Education, Tsinghua Univer-
sity, Beijing. Her research interests fo-
cus on AI-empowered education and student agency de-
velopment.
Ze-Kun Li received his B.E. degree
in data science and big data technolo-
gy from Chongqing University, Chong-
qing,  in  2025.  He  is  currently  a  mas-
ter  student  at  the  School  of  Educa-
tion, Tsinghua University, Beijing. His
research  focuses  on  artificial  intelli-
gence  in  education,  large  language  models,  and  multi-
agent systems.
Bing-Lin  Liu is  currently  a  junior
undergraduate student at the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Tech-
nology,  Tsinghua  University,  Beijing.
His  research  focuses  on  human-agent
interaction.
Xin  Cong is  an  assistant  professor
at  the  Department  of  Statistics  and
Data Science, Tsinghua University. He
received  his  Ph.D.  degree  from  Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, in
2023.  His  research  interests  include
large  language  models,  autonomous
agent, and intelligent data analysis.
Bin  Xu is  a  professor  at  the  De-
partment  of  Computer  Science  and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Bei-
jing.  He  received  his  Ph.D.  degree  at
Tsinghua University, Beijing, in 2006.
He  is  also  a  distinguished  member  of
CCF and honorary chair of CCF tech-
nical  committee  of  computer  applications.  He  is  work-
ing on exciting areas of artificial intelligence.
Lei  Hou is  a  research  associate  at
the  Department  of  Computer  Science
and Technology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing.  He  received  his  Ph.D.  degree
in  computer  science  and  technology
from  Tsinghua  University,  Beijing,  in
2016.  His  research  interests  include
knowledge graph construction and applications and large
language models.
Man-Li  Li is  a  professor  at  the
School of Education, Tsinghua Univer-
sity,  Beijing.  She  received  her  Ph.D.
degree in education from Peking Uni-
versity, Beijing, in 1998. She current-
ly serves as the chair of the Academic
Committee of the School of Education,
Tsinghua University, Beijing. Her research interests in-
clude  higher  education,  engineering  education,  K–12
school reform, online education, and educational equity.
Juan-Zi Li is a professor at the De-
partment  of  Computer  Science  and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Bei-
jing. She received her Ph.D. degree in
computer science and technology from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, in 2000.
She currently serves as the director of
the  Knowledge  Intelligence  Center  at  the  Institute  for
Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University, Beijing. Her
research  interests  include  knowledge  graphs  and  social
network mining.
Hui-Qin Liu is a research fellow at
the  School  of  Education,  Tsinghua
University,  Beijing.  She  received  her
Ph.D. degree in management from Ts-
inghua  University,  Beijing,  in  2006.
She currently serves as the director of
the  Tsinghua  University  Engineering
Education Research Center, Beijing. Her research inter-
ests  include  higher  education  policy  and  management,
graduate  education,  engineering  education,  and  future
education and learning.
Ji-Fan Yu et al.: Reimagine Online Teaching and Learning Through LLM-Driven Agents 413

--- Page 22 ---
Yu  Zhang is  a  professor  at  the
School of Education, Tsinghua Univer-
sity,  Beijing.  She  received  her  Ph.D.
degree  in  economics  and  education
from Teachers College, Columbia Uni-
versity,  New  York,  in  2011.  She  cur-
rently serves as Party Secretary of the
School of Education, Tsinghua University, and Program
Chair of the “Brain, Neuroscience and Education” of the
American  Educational  Research  Association.  Her  re-
search interests include economics of education, quanti-
tative evaluation of education policy innovation, and in-
terdisciplinary education measurement integrating cogni-
tive neuroscience and machine learning.
Zhi-Yuan Liu is a professor at the
Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Bei-
jing.  He  received  his  Ph.D.  degree  in
computer  science  from  Tsinghua  Uni-
versity, Beijing, in 2011. His research
interests  include  knowledge  graphs
and  semantic  computing,  and  social  computing  and
computational social science.
Mao-Song Sun is a professor at the
Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Bei-
jing.  He  received  his  Ph.D.  degree  in
computational  linguistics  from  City
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
in 2004. He currently serves as Execu-
tive Deputy Director of the Institute for Artificial Intel-
ligence, Tsinghua University, Beijng, Chair of the Com-
puter  Science  degree  evaluation  subcommittee  at  Ts-
inghua University, Beijng, and Director of the Tsinghua
University Center for Large-Scale Online Education Re-
search,  Beijng.  His  research  interests  include  natural
language processing, large language models, Chinese in-
formation processing, and social computing.
414 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Jan. 2026, Vol.41, No.1