=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
1
LLaQo: Towards a Query-Based Coach in
Expressive Music Performance Assessment
Huan Zhang ⋆ Vincent K.M. Cheung † Hayato Nishioka † Simon Dixon ⋆ Shinichi Furuya †
⋆ Centre for Digital Music, Queen Mary University of London, UK
†Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Tokyo, Japan
huan.zhang@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract—Research in music understanding has extensively explored
composition-level attributes such as key, genre, and instrumentation
through advanced representations, leading to cross-modal applications
using large language models. However, aspects of musical performance
such as stylistic expression and technique remain underexplored, along
with the potential of using large language models to enhance educational
outcomes with customized feedback. To bridge this gap, we introduce
LLaQo, a Large Language Query-based music coach that leverages audio
language modeling to provide detailed and formative assessments of
music performances. We also introduce instruction-tuned query-response
datasets that cover a variety of performance dimensions from pitch
accuracy to articulation, as well as contextual performance understanding
(such as difficulty and performance techniques). Utilizing AudioMAE
encoder and Vicuna-7b LLM backend, our model achieved state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results in predicting teachers’ performance ratings, as well as
in identifying piece difficulty and playing techniques. Textual responses
from LLaQo was moreover rated significantly higher compared to other
baseline models in a user study using audio-text matching. Our proposed
model can thus provide informative answers to open-ended questions
related to musical performance from audio data.
Index Terms—large language models, music education, performance
assessment, semantical feedback, piano
I. I NTRODUCTION
In the domain of Music Information Retrieval, the majority of
music understanding research has focused on composition-level
attributes such as key, tempo, genre, and instrumentation. [1]–[3]
These attributes are not only tagged individually via end-to-end
approaches but have also been the focus of foundation models and
unified music representations. Recent advances further extended to
cross-modal understanding of music, which enabled tasks such as
music captioning [4], [5] and even music reasoning [6] with the help of
large language models (LLMs). Despite these technological advances,
the nuanced aspects of music performance — such as interpreting
complex techniques, recognizing stylistic differences, and evaluating
performance quality — remain underexplored [7].
On the other hand, traditional systems for music performance
assessment [8] have primarily relied on quantitative metrics that
provide summative feedback, often in the form of scores or binary
judgments [9]–[11]. Such approaches, while beneficial for certain
applications, fall short in educational contexts where formative,
detailed and instructional feedback is essential for student development
[12], [13]. Meanwhile, performance assessment encompasses multiple
dimensions including rhythm accuracy, tone production, and expressive
dynamics, which makes semantic descriptors particularly appropriate.
Thus, we introduce LLaQo (Large Language Query-based Coach),
a pioneering approach in the domain of expressive performance
assessment that leverages the capabilities of LLMs to analyze and
assess music performances at a granular level, providing interpretative
guidance for MIR-supported music pedagogy. Constructed with
AudioMAE for audio embeddings, Vicuna-7b language backend along
Work done during internship at Sony CSL.
with a Q-former aligner, our model is trained on instruction-tuned
data specific to performance assessment. Our contribution 1 can be
summarized as follows:
1) We present the first LLM-supported music coach, addressing
performance understanding tasks including difficulty analysis,
technique analysis, composer recognition, and most importantly,
performance assessment.
2) We compiled and instruction-tuned a diverse collection of
publicly available performance-understanding datasets, and
standardized them into query-response pairs. Additionally, we
contribute a newly recorded dataset, NeuroPiano, with detailed
annotations on 12 performance dimensions.
3) Our model demonstrated superior performance in objective and
subjective evaluation tasks over existing audio-language model
baselines in performance assessment, as well as difficulty and
technique prediction.
II. R ELATED WORK
The integration of large language models with audio signal
processing has been overviewed in Latif et al. [14] and Wu et al.
[15]. Pioneering audio language models (ALM) such as Pengi [16],
LTU [17] and SALMONN [18] bridge audio and speech perception
with natural language reasoning and specializes in tasks from speech
recognition to audio reasoning. Such ALMs are usually composed
of a frozen audio encoder (CLAP [19], Whisper [20]) and a frozen
causal language model (LLaMA [21], GPT2) as backend, and a
trained connection or mapping module that project the input audio
embeddings into the text token space. Given an input audio-text
pair, the models can generate free-form text to address open-ended
tasks and close-ended tasks. In the specific branch of music language
understanding, however, research has mainly focused on music context
question answering [6] and captioning [4], where models are limited to
answering questions on compositional aspects such as genre, mood or
instrumentation. On the other hand, pure LLMs showed poor musical
understanding and are only restricted to answering questions related to
the contextual background behind a musical piece [22], [23]. Models
with adequate musical performance understanding are therefore still
lacking [7].
Another challenge in the field of music understanding relates
to the availability and quality of data. Efforts have been made to
generate natural language descriptions from large-scale tag datasets
through language models, as seen in music captioning initiatives [5].
Additionally, instruction-tuning has been applied to unify disparate
music data annotations for fine-tuning LLMs [6]. In the realm of music
education, however, acquiring precise descriptors for performance
nuances proves difficult [13], whether through automatic means or
manual annotation. This task is further complicated by the inherent
1Code will be made available at: https://github.com/anusfoil/LLaQo, Data
is demonstrated in project page: https://bit.ly/3XjUOuX
arXiv:2409.08795v2  [eess.AS]  16 Sep 2024

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
2
Pitch
Integrity
Tempo
Is the performed note accurate?
Is the performance hesitant or 
smooth?
Is the performed tempo stable? 
Rhythm Is the rhythm accurate?
Articulation Is the articulation appropriate? 
Pedal Is the pedal change clean?
Is the pedal usage appropriate? 
Timbre 
(tone-production) How is the tone production?
Dynamics Is the contrast in dynamics 
reasonable?
Difficulty & Techniques
Compositional Background
Performance understanding
Balance Is the balance between both 
hands reasonable?
How would you rate the difficulty level of the piece? 
What are some technical challenges of the piece?
Who might be the composer of the piece? 
Is the interpretation appropriate to the style of the 
composition? 
Is the recording played by a student or a master?
What’s the overall rating you would give to the 
performance?
What does the student need to work on？
Objective measures Descriptive measures
AudioMAE 
Encoder
Vicuna LLM 
❄Qformer Aligner
Q: What’s your 
feedback on this 
performance?
LLM Tokenizer
 A: The 
performance is 
good, but the right 
hand could have a 
stronger rhythm.
Embedding layer
Projection
Learned query
Tokenizer
Fig. 1. Overall framework of our model, as well as the piano assessment rubric used to construct query-answer pairs for instruction-tuning in each dataset.
perceptural subjectivity, which can lead to bias and inconsistency
in human feedback [8], [24]. Despite these challenges, the field
of automatic music assessment has seen considerable benefits from
leveraging formative text feedback [12], which provides a richer
alternative to traditional methods that rely on simplistic summative
scoring systems [9]–[11].
III. I NSTRUCTION TUNING DATASET ON
MUSIC EDUCATION
In Table I, we describe the instruction-tuned expressive performance
datasets used to train our framework. Several types of data were
utilized:
The first consisted of teachers’ free-response feedback 2 [24],
[25] that provides a holistic comment on a performance, covering
various performance dimensions or practice suggestions. This data
was transformed into query-response pairs using GPT4 according to
the instruction of an assessment rubric in Figure 1. For each piece
of feedback (around 30 to 50 words), we generated three to five QA
pairs.
The second comprised data with performance-related annotations
[26], [27], such as a specific articulation or tempo. In this case, queries
were formed based on their performance attributes, with examples
such as Is the playing using legato or staccato articulation?
The third consisted of single-rating datasets [28], [29] that come
with a summative rating. The query was designed to ask directly about
the rating, such as How would you rate the overall performance, in a
scale of 10?
The last data type comprised performance understanding data [7],
[30] that do not address the quality of a performance, but on contextual
information that is ideally obtained by a teacher or student, such as
What’s the most difficult technique in this passage? or What is the
composer and stylistic period of this piece? In total, we aggregated
around 130 hours of recording and 34k QA pairs for training.
For this project, we also recorded a student pianist dataset with
detailed teacher annotations (the NeuroPiano dataset). It consists
of short technique snippets including scales, stepwise chords, and
third dyads performed by students 3. Based on the rubric in Figure 1,
we formulated 12 questions, ranging from tone production to hand
balance, in which teachers provided textual feedback and a rating
score on a scale from 1 to 6. Note that the original annotations are
2The CROCUS dataset is translated from Japanese to English using DeepL.
3From the NeuroPiano Music academy: www.neuropiano.org
in Japanese, in which we used DeepL to translate to English, and
performed a round of manual correction. The dataset is further spitted
by half for training, with the remaining half used for objective and
subjective evaluation described in Section V.
IV. M ODEL ARCHITECTURE AND TRAINING
The overall structure of LLaQo is based on the APT-LLM [34]
framework, which originates from BLIP-2 framework, as shown
in Fig 1. It is comprised of an audio encoder, an audio-language
aligner, and a large language model. We use Audio-MAE [35], a 12-
layer transformer encoder that learns to reconstruct randomly-masked
spectrogram patches during training, as the audio encoder. The output
feature map from the penultimate block of Audio-MAE encodes
fine-grained patterns that’s essential for performance understanding.
The audio-language aligner connects the audio encoder to the frozen
language model. It takes in a text prompt together with audio feature
maps extracted by the audio encoder, and produces a fixed number
of acoustic embeddings. Following a Query Transformer (Q-former)
architecture, four transformer blocks constitute our audio aligner where
32 trainable query embeddings attend to the input text tokens and
extract relevant information from the audio feature maps.
The language model predicts the output text by considering the
previous generated texts and the input audio-text tokens. When
interleaving audio and text tokens, each audio clip is appended with
a learnable token ⟨AUDIO⟩ to indicate the beginning of audio tokens.
As shown in Figure 1, the query text pass through both the Q-former
tokenizer and LLM’s tokenizer and its word embedding layer. We
parameterize the language model by Vicuna-7b [36].
A. Learning Objective
Consider an audio-text pair (a, t) and their response g. The audio
input a is transformed into a sequence of embeddings Xaudio using the
encoder Aϕ and aligner Mθ. These embeddings are then concatenated
with text embeddings Xtext, derived from input text t using the
embedding layer Wψ to form the combined sequence Xaudio;text. More
precisely, the embeddings are concatenated as follows:
Xaudio;text = C(Mθ(Aϕ(a)), Wψ(t)), (1)
where C denotes the concatenation function.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
3
Dataset Recordings QA pairs Level Feedback or Annotation Repertoire
Expert-Novice ( [24]) 83 2.4k beginner Full verbal feedback and rat-
ings
Pop song arrangements
CROCUS-piano ( [25]) 22 616 intermediate, ad-
vanced
Verbal feedback Western classical concert repertoire
Con Espressione ( [31]) 50 4.3k master, MIDI Description of expressive
character
Western classical concert repertoire
Expressive Musical Ges-
tures ( [26])
106 845 intermediate Labels of performance in-
struction (e.g. slow, staccato)
‘Tr¨aumerei’ by R. Schumann
Burgmuller ( [32]) 25 114 intermediate Annotation of error regions Burgmuller Etudes
Music Shape Dataset (
[27])
2.3K 11k intermediate Annotations of dynamics and
articulation changes
Schmitt exercise
PISA ( [28]) 61 256 beginner-
intermediate
Single rating score Folk songs arrangements, easy classical
pieces
YCU-PPE ( [29]) 2.6K 7.7k beginner Rating score from 3 judges Chinese folk song arrangements
PLD-expertise ( [7],
[33])
1.4k 2k beginner and ad-
vanced
Performing skill level based
on the uploader’s profile
Western classical concert repertoire
PLD-techniques ( [7]) 223 223 mixed Piano Technique labeling (e.g.
arpeggio, octave)
Music segments of common piano tech-
niques such as scales, ornaments, re-
peated notes, etc.
CIPI ( [30]) 736 2.2k intermediate to
advanced
Henle Difficulty labeling on
a scale of 9
Western classical concert repertoire
NeuroPiano (ours) 104 3.3k advanced text response on 12 specific
aspects including articulation
and tempo, as well as rating
score on a scale of 6
Short technique snippets including
scales, arpeggios, dyads, blocked
chords, octaves
TABLE I
PUBLIC DATASETS RELATED TO PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT AND PERFORMANCE UNDERSTANDING , INSTRUCTION -TUNED FOR TRAINING OUR MODEL .
The learning objective L of our model is to optimize the parameters
ϕ, θ, and ψ to maximize its ability to predict the next token based
on the concatenated embeddings by minimizing cross-entropy loss:
L =
L+|g|X
i=L+1
logpϕ,θ,ψ (Xi|Xaudio;text, Xpred,<i), (2)
where L is the length of Xaudio;text. This formulation allows us to
directly leverage the audio-text context to predict subsequent tokens.
B. Experiment setup
Pretraining: We first pretrain the audio aligner module to bridge
the audio modality and the text modality. The Qformer audio aligner
is trained with audio-text pairs from AudioSet and WavCaps, with
the triplet objective of audio-text matching, audio-grounded text
generation, and audio-text contrastive as described in [34]. This step
is performed on four NVIDIA A100 (40G) and trained for 120 hours.
General audio multi-task finetuning : The first-stage finetuning
trains the whole pipeline as described in the previous section. It
is performed on general audio tasks such as audio tagging, audio
captioning, audio question answering, facilitated by datasets including
AudioSet, WavCaps, and Clotho. Furthermore, it learns from multiple
audio clips through few-shot audio classification and natural language
audio reasoning, where it predicts sound event labels by juxtaposing
more than one audio clips with input text. This step is performed on
four NVIDIA A100 (40G) and trained for 120 hours.
LLaQo data finetuning: The final round of finetuning is trained with
intruction-tuned datasets in Table I, with (a, t, g) triplets as described
in Equation 2. This last step is performed on one NVIDIA H100
(80G) GPU and trained for 120 hours.
Adam optimiser was used for all model training described above.
We applied linear warmup strategy in the first 2K steps and used a
cosine annealing learning rate of 5 × 105. For the AudioMAE input,
we resampled all data into 32kHz and computed Kaldi filterbank with
128 mels and a frameshift of 10 ms. Due to resource limitation, our
input is limited to a filterbank of length 4096 (40 seconds).
V. E VALUATION AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Compared baselines
For all tasks, we compared our model against two open-source audio-
language models capable of answering audio QA tasks, namely Listen,
Think and Understand (LTU-AS) [17], which is an improvement of
the LTU [37] that incorporates Whisper [20] and low-rank adaptors
to the language model, as well as Music Understanding LLaMa
(MuLLaMA) [4], which is trained on a generated MusicQA dataset
and utilizes MERT encoder for audio representation to answer music-
related questions and generate captions for tracks.
B. Objective evaluation
Given an audio input, we first evaluated the performance of each
model in terms of its ability to answer open and closed questions
regarding Performance assessment , Difficulty, and Technique. We
performed three iterations of objective evaluation to ensure that the
reported results were stable.
To evaluate Performance assessment, each model was required to
provide open responses to 12 questions related to the quality of a
performance (see Figure 1), as well as an integer score from 1 to 6
(e.g., with the prompt ‘How would you rate the consistency of the
tempo on a scale of 1 to 6?’ ) on the evaluation set of the NeuroPiano
dataset. Model performance on open questions was assessed in terms
of semantic validity and given in terms of common NLP metrics,
namely BLEU (B-U) (an average of BLEU1, BLEU2, BLEU3 and
BLEU4), SPICE [38] and BERT-Score (BERT-S). We also measured
sentiment similarity (SS), which is quantified by the cosine similarity
of a 5-class sentiment vector between teachers’ feedback and model

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
4
Performance assessment Difficulty Technique
Model PFR ↑ MAE↓ SS↑ B-U↑ SPICE↑ BERT-S↑ Acc0 ↑ Acc1 ↑ Acc0 ↑
LLaQo 0.99±0.02 0.97 ±0.10 0.52 ±0.08 0.09 ±0.02 0.12 ±0.04 0.88 ±0.07 0.21 ±0.10 0.55 ±0.15 0.37 ±0.12
LTU 0.98 ±0.01 1.39 ±0.08 0.32 ±0.05 0.06 ±0.03 0.07 ±0.10 0.87 ±0.12 0.16 ±0.09 0.34 ±0.13 0.16 ±0.07
MU-LLaMa 0.66 ±0.07 1.81 ±0.15 0.40 ±0.10 0.06 ±0.05 0.12 ±0.06 0.88 ±0.09 0.11 ±0.12 0.26 ±0.18 0.20 ±0.10
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF MODELS ON THE METRICS OF THE EVALUATED CONTENT . N UMBERS INDICATE MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION . ↑ INDICATES LARGER
VALUE FOR BETTER PERFORMANCE , AND VICE VERSA .
output as given by a sentiment analysis model4. Performance on closed
questions was quantified using mean absolute error (MAE), which
measures the deviation from the predicted rating with the teacher
rating, and prompt following rate (PFR), which defines the ratio in
which the model actually produced a numerical rating. Given that
baseline models LTU and Mu-LLaMa are not specifically trained for
numerical predictions, we allowed a maximum of 5 attempts for them
to generate a numerical rating.
To evaluate Difficulty and Technique, we followed the same
procedure as in [7]. For Difficulty, each model was required to produce
an integer score from 1 to 9 given the prompt ‘How would you rate
the difficulty of the piece on a scale of 9?’ on the CIPI dataset [30].
Model performance was quantified in terms of proportion of exact
matches (Acc0), and proportion of matches that deviate by at most
1 ( Acc1). For Technique, each model was required to select 1 of 7
playing techniques in response to the prompt ‘What’s the most salient
technique used in this recording? Choose from trills, octaves... ’ on
the PLD-techniques dataset [7], and evaluated in terms of Acc0.
The results, presented in Table IV-B, reveal that our proposed
LLaQo model achieved the best performance amongst all models
with regards to all objective metrics. Numerical predictions by LLaQo
was within a MAE of less than 1 on a scale of 6, indicating a close
alignment between its predictions and the teachers’ ground truth. Also,
while LLaQo and LTU were able to consistently return numerical
ratings, MU-LLaMa struggled, as shown by a low PFR score.
Generated repsonses by LLaQo also showed substantially higher
sentiment similarity with the ground truth (0.52) compared to LTU and
MU-LLaMA. However, the BLEU score was relatively low across all
models compared to typical values of 0.2-0.3 [4] in music captioning
tasks. This could be attributed to the expansive semantic space used
by the teacher for feedback, where traditional NLP metrics might not
have been suited for evaluating feedback responses in this context.
Likewise, all models achieved similar BERT-S scores possible because
all model responses remained on-topic.
Lastly, while LLaQo surpassed the baseline models for difficulty
and technique prediction by a wide margin, it is interesting to note
that it did not outperform non-LLM based approaches on the same
dataset (e.g. [30] achieved Acc0 = 0.39 in Difficulty, [7] reported
Acc0 = 0.47 in Technique).
C. Subjective feedback evaluation
We conducted a human-based evaluation using audio-text matching
[6] to subjectively evaluate the quality of textual answers provided by
each model. Given a query and audio, participants (20 music students
and teachers) rated the response from each model on a 4-point scale
in terms of their relevance to the question and alignment with the
performance content. In particular, three categories of open-ended
questions were matched:
1) Feedback: What’s your overall feedback on this performance? ,
or How clean is the attack? , or Is the dynamics change natural?
4https://huggingface.co/nlptown/bert-base-multilingual-uncased-sentiment
Fig. 2. Audio-text matching subjective evaluation result of three models, with
errors bars indicating standard error of the mean.
2) Suggestion: What does the student need to work on?
3) Appreciation: How would you describe the emotional intent of
the performance?
Participants rated 250 randomly sampled questions on Feedback and
Suggestion from the NeuroPiano dataset, as well as 250 questions
on Feedback, Suggestion, and Appreciation from the Expert-Novice,
CROCUS and YCU-PPE datasets.
Results of the audio-text matching task are shown in Figure 2. In
terms of Suggestions, participants rated our proposed LLaQo model
significantly higher than LTU and MU-LLaMa in bothNeuroPiano and
Other datasets (Mann-Whitney U-test, NeuroPiano: p(corrected) =
0.0274 and p = 0 .0013, respectively; Other: p = 0 .0382 and p =
0.0028, respectively). Similarly, LLaQo was rated the highest for
Feedback in both datasets, scoring significantly higher than LTU
in both ( p = 7 .2 × 10−4 and p = 1 .9 × 10−4, respectively) and
MU-LLaMa in Others ( p = 0.0028). Lastly, participants gave highest
ratings for LLaQo in questions related to Appreciation, though the
differences were not statistically significant.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper introduced the LLaQo model, designed for music-
education related question answering, which is the first study that
use Large Language Model to support music pedagogy. Our model
offers performance feedback and suggestions, as well as information
on performance techniques and piece difficulty, and has demonstrated
superior performance in objective and subjective evaluation tasks
over existing models such as LTU and MU-LLaMa. Additionally, we
contributed a collection of instruction-tuned music question answering
datasets, including the recorded and annotated in-house, and previously
unreleased NeuroPiano dataset.
Though our model is currently trained on piano sets, our framework
can be easily extended towards other instruments, when large-scale
assessment data become available. Future work should also consider
timestamp positioning of feedback, as the ability to correctly locate
an error, (e.g. the first measure, the last beat) is crucial for informative
feedback. Advances in position-aware audio - or even musical score
-representations may prove fruitful for this endeavor.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
5
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the UKRI Centre for Doctoral Training in
Artificial Intelligence and Music, funded by UK Research and Innova-
tion [grant number EP/S022694/1], and Japan Science and Technology
Agency CREST grant [number JPMJCR20D4]. The compute in this
research utilised Queen Mary’s Apocrita HPC facility, supported by
QMUL Research-IT. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.438045.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Korzeniowski and G. Widmer, “End-to-end musical key estimation us-
ing a convolutional neural network,” in 25th European Signal Processing
Conference, EUSIPCO, 2017.
[2] J. Pons, O. Nieto, M. Prockup, E. Schmidt, A. Ehmann, and X. Serra,
“End-to-end learning for music audio tagging at scale,” Proceedings of the
19th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference
(ISMIR), pp. 637–644, 2018.
[3] H. Flores Garcia, A. Aguilar, E. Manilow, and B. Pardo, “Leveraging
hierarchical structures for few-shot musical instrument recognition,” in
Proceedings of the 22th International Society for Music Information
Retrieval Conference, ISMIR 2021 , 2021.
[4] S. Liu, A. S. Hussain, C. Sun, and Y . Shan, “Music understanding
LLaMA: Advancing text-to-music generation with question answering
and captioning,” in Proceeding of the IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2024.
[5] S. Doh, K. Choi, J. Lee, and J. Nam, “LP-MusicCaps: LLM-based pseudo
music captioning,” in Proceeding of the 24th International Society on
Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR) , 2023.
[6] J. Gardner, S. Durand, D. Stoller, and R. M. Bittner, “Llark: A multi-
modal foundation model for music,” in In Proceedings of International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , Oct. 2024.
[7] H. Zhang, J. Liang, and S. Dixon, “From audio encoders to piano judges:
Benchmarking performance understanding for solo piano,” in Proceeding
of the 25t International Society on Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR) ,
2024.
[8] A. Lerch, C. Arthur, A. Pati, and S. Gururani, “Music performance
analysis: A survey,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Society for
Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR) , 2019.
[9] H. Zhang, Y . Jiang, T. Jiang, and P. Hu, “Learn by referencing: Towards
deep metric learning for singing assessment,” in Proceedings of the
22nd International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference
(ISMIR), 2021.
[10] J. Huang, Y .-N. Hung, A. Pati, S. K. Gururani, and A. Lerch, “Score-
informed networks for music performance assessment,” in Proceedings of
the 21st International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference
(ISMIR), 2020.
[11] P. Seshadri and A. Lerch, “Improving music performance assessment with
contrastive learning,” in Proceedings of the 22nd International Society
for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR) , 2021.
[12] V . Eremenko, A. Morsi, J. Narang, and X. Serra, “Performance assessment
technologies for the support of musical instrument learning,” Proceedings
of the 12th International Conference on Computer Supported Education
(CSME), 2020.
[13] A. Morsi, H. Zhang, A. Maezawa, S. Dixon, and X. Serra, “Simulating
piano performance mistakes for music learning,” In Proceedings of the
Sound and Music Computing Conference (SMC) , 2024.
[14] S. Latif, M. Shoukat, F. Shamshad, M. Usama, Y . Ren, H. Cuay ´ahuitl,
W. Wang, X. Zhang, R. Togneri, E. Cambria, and B. W. Schuller, “Sparks
of large audio models: A survey and outlook,” pp. 1–32, 2023.
[15] H. Wu, X. Chen, Y .-C. Lin, K.-w. Chang, H.-L. Chung, A. H. Liu, and
H.-y. Lee, “Towards audio language modeling - an overview,” pp. 4–8,
2024.
[16] S. Deshmukh, B. Elizalde, R. Singh, and H. Wang, “Pengi: An audio
language model for audio tasks,” in In Proceedings of the Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023.
[17] Y . Gong, A. H. Liu, H. Luo, L. Karlinsky, and J. Glass, “Joint audio
and speech understanding,” in 2023 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition
and Understanding Workshop, ASRU , 2023.
[18] C. Tang, W. Yu, G. Sun, X. Chen, T. Tan, W. Li, L. Lu, Z. Ma, and
C. Zhang, “Salmonn: Towards generic hearing abilities for large language
models,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), vol. 82, no. 2, 2024.
[19] B. Elizalde, S. Deshmukh, M. A. Ismail, and H. Wang, “Clap learning
audio concepts from natural language supervision,” ICASSP , IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing -
Proceedings, vol. 2023-June, 2023.
[20] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and
I. Sutskever, “Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision,”
in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 202, 2023, pp. 28 492–
28 518.
[21] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-a. Lachaux, T. Lacroix,
B. Rozi `ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar, A. Rodriguez, A. Joulin,
E. Grave, and G. Lample, “Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
models,” arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[22] J. Li, L. Yang, M. Tang, C. Chen, Z. Li, P. Wang, and H. Zhao, “The
music maestro or the musically challenged , a massive music evaluation
benchmark for large language models,” in In Proceedings of the Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2024.
[23] Y . Ma, A. Øland, A. Ragni, B. M. Del Sette, C. Saitis, C. Donahue, C. Lin,
C. Plachouras, E. Benetos, E. Quinton, E. Shatri, F. Morreale, G. Zhang,
G. Fazekas, G. Xia, H. Zhang, I. Manco, J. Huang, J. Guinot, L. Lin,
L. Marinelli, M. W. Y . Lam, M. Sharma, Q. Kong, R. B. Dannenberg,
R. Yuan, S. Wu, S.-L. Wu, S. Dai, S. Lei, S. Kang, S. Dixon, W. Chen,
W. Huang, X. Du, X. Qu, X. Tan, Y . Li, Z. Tian, Z. Wu, Z. Wu, Z. Ma, and
Z. Wang, “Foundation models for music: A survey,” arXiv:2408.14340,
2024.
[24] Y . Jiang, “Expert and novice evaluations of piano performances : Criteria
for computer-aided feedback,” in Proceeding of the 24th International
Society on Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR) , 2023.
[25] M. Matsubara, R. Kagawa, T. Hirano, and I. Tsuji, “CROCUS: Dataset
of musical performance critiques,” in In Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Computer Music Multidisciplinary Research (CMMR) ,
2021.
[26] A. Sarasu ´a, B. Caramiaux, A. Tanaka, and M. Ortiz, “Datasets for the
analysis of expressive musical gestures,” in In Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Movement Computing (MOCO) , 2017.
[27] X. Li, S. Weiss, Y . Yan, Y . Li, J. Ren, J. Soraghan, and M. Gong,
“Siamese residual neural network for musical shape evaluation in piano
performance assessment,” in Proceeding of the 31st European Signal
Processing Conference, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[28] P. Parmar, J. Reddy, and B. Morris, “Piano skills assessment,” in IEEE
23th International Workshop on Multimedia Signal Processing (MMSP) ,
2021.
[29] W. Wang, J. Pan, H. Yi, Z. Song, and M. Li, “Audio-based piano
performance evaluation for beginners with convolutional neural network
and attention mechanism,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio Speech
and Language Processing , vol. 29, pp. 1119–1133, 2021.
[30] P. Ramoneda, D. Jeong, V . Eremenko, N. C. Tamer, M. Miron, and
X. Serra, “Combining piano performance dimensions for score difficulty
classification,” Expert Systems with Applications , 2024.
[31] C. Cancino-Chac´on, S. Peter, S. Chowdhury, A. Aljanaki, and G. Widmer,
“On the characterization of expressive performance in classical music:
First results of the con espressione game,” in Proceedings of the 21st
International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR),
2020.
[32] A. Morsi, K. Tatsumi, A. Maezawa, T. Fujishima, and X. Serra, “Sounds
Out of Pl ¨ace? Score-independent detection of conspicuous mistakes in
piano performances,” in Proceeding of the 24th International Society on
Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR) , 2023.
[33] H. Zhang, J. Tang, S. Rafee, S. Dixon, and G. Fazekas, “ATEPP: A
dataset of automatically transcribed expressive piano performance,” in
Proceedings of the International Society for Music Information Retrieval
Conference (ISMIR), Bengaluru, India, 2022.
[34] J. Liang, X. Liu, W. Wang, M. D. Plumbley, H. Phan, and E. Benetos,
“Acoustic prompt tuning: Empowering large language models with
audition capabilities,” arXiv: 2312.00249, 2023.
[35] P.-y. H. Hu, X. Juncheng, C. Feichtenhofer, and M. Ai, “Masked
autoencoders that listen,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022.
[36] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y . Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y . Zhuang,
Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. P. Xing, H. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica,
“Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena,” in NeurIPS
2023 Datasets and Benchmarks Poster .
[37] Y . Gong, H. Luo, A. H. Liu, L. Karlinsky, and J. Glass, “Listen, think,
and understand,” in In proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024.
[38] P. Anderson, B. Fernando, M. Johnson, and S. Gould, “Spice: Semantic
propositional image caption evaluation,” in In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision , 2016.