=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses
with Interactive Diagrams
Peiling Jiang∗
peiling@ucsd.edu
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, California, USA
Jude Rayan∗
jrayan@ucsd.edu
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, California, USA
Steven P. Dow
spdow@ucsd.edu
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, California, USA
Haijun Xia
haijunxia@ucsd.edu
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, California, USA
Figure 1: Graphologue constructs an interactive diagram in real-time as GPT-4 text responses are streamed in.
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) have recently soared in popularity
due to their ease of access and the unprecedented ability to syn-
thesize text responses to diverse user questions. However, LLMs
like ChatGPT present significant limitations in supporting com-
plex information tasks due to the insufficient affordances of the
text-based medium and linear conversational structure. Through
a formative study with ten participants, we found that LLM in-
terfaces often present long-winded responses, making it difficult
for people to quickly comprehend and interact flexibly with vari-
ous pieces of information, particularly during more complex tasks.
We present Graphologue, an interactive system that converts text-
based responses from LLMs into graphical diagrams to facilitate
information-seeking and question-answering tasks. Graphologue
employs novel prompting strategies and interface designs to ex-
tract entities and relationships from LLM responses and constructs
node-link diagrams in real-time. Further, users can interact with
the diagrams to flexibly adjust the graphical presentation and to
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0132-0/23/10.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606737
submit context-specific prompts to obtain more information. Utiliz-
ing diagrams, Graphologue enables graphical, non-linear dialogues
between humans and LLMs, facilitating information exploration,
organization, and comprehension.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Information systems → Users and interactive retrieval ; •
Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction
(HCI); Visualization.
KEYWORDS
Large Language Model, Natural Language Interface, Visualization
ACM Reference Format:
Peiling Jiang, Jude Rayan, Steven P. Dow, and Haijun Xia. 2023. Graphologue:
Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams. In
The 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology
(UIST ’23), October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 20 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606737
1 INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have seen a surge in popularity due
to their impressive ability to generate high-quality textual responses
to natural language prompts across a wide variety of tasks [14].
More than a billion people have used interfaces to LLMs, such as
ChatGPT, to obtain information and answers to questions. With the
arXiv:2305.11473v2  [cs.HC]  4 Aug 2023

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
potential to dramatically transform how people complete informa-
tion processing tasks, LLMs are becoming increasingly important
tools in various fields [14, 64].
Despite their potential, interactions with LLMs are primarily me-
diated through text-based conversational interfaces, which presents
inherent limitations in terms of supporting complex information
activities. As a sequence of symbols, text can be insufficient for
communicating concepts that contain complex relationships and
structures, often leading to verbose responses that demand sub-
stantial effort to digest [19]. In addition, the linear conversation
structure can hinder the iterative concept exploration workflows
that employ non-linear structures (e.g., brainstorming ideas), result-
ing in excessive and verbose conversational exchanges where the
users often lose track [36]. These intrinsic constraints of text-based
conversational interfaces limit the effectiveness of leveraging LLMs
for complex information tasks [69].
Graphical representations, such as diagrams and charts, on the
other hand, can compensate for the aforementioned limitations
by displaying information in a non-linear manner, enabling the
more flexible organization of concepts and reducing the cognitive
load needed for comprehension [ 3, 52, 84]. Interactive graphics
can further facilitate the manipulation of information, enabling
users to effectively obtain, organize, transform, and make sense of
information [33, 44, 45, 86]. For these reasons, graphical represen-
tations have been extensively studied and utilized in various fields,
including HCI [37], Visualization [20], Cognitive Science [23], Com-
munication [60], and beyond. The goal of this project, therefore,
is to capitalize on the advantages of graphical representations to
mitigate challenges associated with text-based conversational in-
terfaces in LLM applications. We envision a graphical conversation
between humans and LLMs, continuing the fruitful and long-lasting
endeavor in HCI [79].
Because text and graphics are both versatile media that can uti-
lize different formats and styles for different tasks, it is important
to target specific tasks for meaningful generalization. We focus on
supporting exploratory information-seeking, concept explanation,
and question-answering tasks with LLMs using graphical represen-
tations. To understand the challenges of utilizing LLMs for these
tasks, we conducted a formative study with ten participants to ob-
serve how they used ChatGPT to explore and learn about a domain
of interest. Participants reported that the text-based responses from
LLMs are often verbose and time-consuming to comprehend. In
addition, we observed that the text-based linear conversational
structure imposed many cumbersome interactions, such as repet-
itive copy-and-paste and back-and-forth scrolling, to carry out
complex information tasks.
Informed by the formative study, we designed Graphologue, an
interactive system that converts textual responses from LLMs into
graphical diagrams, in real-time, to facilitate complex and multi-
faceted information-seeking and question-answering tasks. Grapho-
logue employs novel prompting strategies to have LLMs recognize
and annotate entities and relationships inline within the generated
responses to facilitate the real-time construction of node-link dia-
grams. To avoid overly complex diagrams, Graphologue employs
prompting strategies and interaction techniques to enable users to
flexibly control the complexity of the diagrams. For example, users
can toggle the diagrams to show only salient relationships, collapse
branches of the diagrams to reduce the presented information, and
combine separate smaller diagrams into one diagram to view all
concepts as a whole. To gain more information about concepts
presented in the diagram, users can employ direct manipulation
of the graphical interface, which is subsequently translated into
context-aware prompts for the LLM, enabling users to engage in a
“graphical dialogue” with LLMs.
To evaluate how effectively Graphologue facilitates graphical
interaction with LLMs for information-seeking tasks, we conducted
a user evaluation with seven experienced LLM users. We found that
Graphologue helped them quickly grasp key concepts and their
connections while ensuring sufficient control of the complexity
of the diagrams. Together with other representations that are in-
teractively synchronized with the diagrams, such as the raw text
and the outline, Graphologue enabled participants to leverage the
combined strengths of different representations to understand LLM
responses at various levels and scales. This work thus makes the
following contributions:
(1) A formative study that uncovered limitations in using a
conversational interface for complex sensemaking tasks.
(2) Graphologue1, an interactive system that employs prompt-
ing strategies and interaction techniques to enable real-time
construction of and interaction with node-link diagrams
based on LLM-generated information to facilitate compre-
hension and exploration.
(3) A qualitative evaluation that provided insights regarding the
advantages and disadvantages of the diagrammatic represen-
tation, the complimentary usage of multiple representations,
and future directions of employing graphical interfaces to
interact with LLMs.
2 RELATED WORK
As our research aims to address the many challenges of natural
language interfaces for LLMs by using graphical representations,
we review prior work on Natural Language User Interfaces and
LLMs, generating graphical representations from text, as well as
Visualization and multilevel abstraction of information.
2.1 Natural Language User Interfaces and LLMs
The impressive performance and the public release of LLMs have
sparked imaginations for applying this technology to various do-
mains such as programming [21, 67, 82], writing support [25, 35, 92],
learning [7, 50, 56], and many others [11, 18, 30, 74], and further
promoting the notion of natural language interfaces the HCI com-
munity has been exploring.
Natural language interfaces offer the key benefit of enabling
users to directly articulate their intended actions and goals without
learning and utilizing complex manual user interfaces. Pioneering
systems, such as SHRDLU [ 85], Put-that-there [ 10], and Quick-
set [28] allowed users to verbally instruct a computer with natu-
ral language commands. Later research extended this interaction
paradigm to data analysis [ 34], image editing [ 49], and more. A
limitation of these systems, however, is that they require users to
1The prototype is available at https://graphologue.app.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
translate their high-level design intention to low-level, rigid com-
mands or queries, limiting the fluidity and expressiveness afforded
by language as a communication medium [89].
Another approach to natural language interfaces has been ex-
tracting user intents from their natural expressions to enable less
rigid communication between humans and computers by leverag-
ing advanced natural language understanding and domain-specific
knowledge. Iris, for example, enables users to describe data analysis
goals and disambiguate system interpretations using natural expres-
sions [32]. CrossData infers the desired data values and operations
from text to report in the data insights without instructing the
system [22]. Crosspower employs a human-in-the-loop approach
by enabling users to interact with linguistic structures in a video
script to convey high-level design goals regarding the graphical
content and structures [89].
While the unparalleled language understanding and generation
capability of LLMs enables users to obtain meaningful responses
with flexible natural language expressions, the inherent intelligence
architecture of LLMs poses additional usability challenges. Many
tasks require users to go through arduous and time-consuming
prompt engineering to produce well-crafted prompts, thereby en-
suring results that align with their intents [55, 70, 94].
Our work leverages advances in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) but shares the spirit of Sketchpad, a seminal work in HCI
that pioneered the graphical communication between humans and
machines [79]. Specifically, we leverage the generative power of
GPT-4 to not only obtain information but also to annotate its own
text-based LLM responses to facilitate the simultaneous creation of
graphical representations.
2.2 Text to Graphical Representations
Graphical representations are prevalent across various domains
to enhance communication and sensemaking [ 8]. By leveraging
human aptitude for visual information processing, they offer advan-
tages in comprehension, memory, and inference of the content [1],
making them an effective tool to improve information understand-
ing and learning [44, 47, 57, 71, 78]. In addition, the generation and
modification of graphical representations, such as sketching and
annotating, make them ideal for sensemaking tasks [15, 36, 54, 65].
Consequently, significant research in HCI and visualization has
explored the design and creation of graphical representations. The
recent advancement of NLP has further enabled the automatic
generation of graphical content such as visualizations [ 62], 3D
scenes [17], animations [42], and videos [31].
For example, systems have been developed to generate visual-
izations and link existing ones with natural language descriptions
to assist the communication and comprehension of data insights
[6, 29, 48, 58]. Techniques have been proposed to automatically gen-
erate videos from natural descriptions [73], structured markdown
documents [24], or informal conversations [91] to create a visual
consumption experience without significant manual effort.
Closely related is work that explores the generation of node-link
diagrams based on the text from a variety of sources such as video
transcripts [39, 53, 80], documents [26], and social media data [43].
For example, More et al. leveraged NLP to generate Unified Model-
ing Language (UML) diagrams from natural language specifications
to facilitate the analysis of software systems [59]. ConceptGuide
compiles the transcripts from multiple YouTube videos of a certain
topic and then constructs a concept map revealing the various re-
lationships between the videos in order to ease the video-based
learning process [53, 80].
Unlike previous work that generates diagrams using existing
static text content, this work explores the interaction with node-link
diagrams generated from the dynamic text output from LLMs. We
explore prompting strategies that enable real-time construction of
and interaction with the diagrams to facilitate the comprehension
of information provided by LLMs.
2.3 Multilevel Abstraction and Visualization of
Information
Extensive research in HCI and Visualization has investigated inter-
action and visualization techniques that allow users to quickly grasp
an overview of complex information while maintaining access to
detailed, low-level information or system functionality.
In the field of information visualization, the ‘focus + context’
design principle states that users need both detail and overview to
make sense of information [16]. Information of interest and impor-
tance should be displayed in detail, while relevant context should be
presented simultaneously to show how these informational details
connect to the context.
Bederson and Hollan introduced semantic zooming, which dis-
plays information at varying levels of detail corresponding to the
scale within a zoomable user interface [9]. Norman et al. proposed
the concept of progressive disclosure, suggesting that interfaces
should progressively inform users about a system by gradually pro-
viding pieces of information that contribute to the overall under-
standing [63]. Xia et al. explored how users could leverage flexible
representational transformation to adjust content representations
semantically, structurally, and temporally according to their needs,
rather than conforming to a single representation imposed by the
user interface [90]. This concept was later applied to a program visu-
alization system, allowing programmers to visually inspect program
behaviors at different levels of scope and abstraction [40]. Victor
explored how varying levels of abstraction over data, procedures,
and iteration could help explain complex system behaviors [83].
Graphologue builds upon these prior works to ensure the graph-
ical diagrams are easy to understand by enabling users to flexibly
control the levels of detail of the diagrams and synchronizing them
with the original text, which provides the full context.
3 FORMATIVE STUDY
We conducted a formative study aiming to uncover the prevailing
experiences and challenges associated with using current conver-
sational interfaces to interact with LLMs. The results of this study
informed the design choices we made for Graphologue.
3.1 Participants and Procedure
Ten participants with a variety of ChatGPT experiences were re-
cruited, including two first-time users, six casual users who are
familiar with ChatGPT, and two experienced users who use it daily
with advanced prompting techniques and have developed appli-
cations using OpenAI’s API. The study sessions were conducted

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
over Zoom for an hour each, and participants received 15 USD as
compensation for their participation.
Participants completed a pre-task survey that collected demo-
graphic information and their experience with ChatGPT. They were
then asked to select one topic (from Neuro-divergence, Supply and
Demand, Northern Lights, and Inflation) to explore using ChatGPT.
Participants were provided with a task description document con-
taining questions related to the chosen topic, which were designed
to help them broadly and deeply explore the topic. Participants
were given 30 minutes to explore the topic and then interviewed to
reflect on their experiences with a focus on the usability pain points
of using ChatGPT to obtain, manage, and understand information.
Participants were also encouraged to share functionality that they
thought would help circumvent the issues they had encountered.
The interviews were recorded, transcribed, and analyzed using the
reflexive thematic analysis method [12].
3.2 Findings and Discussion
All participants explored the concepts and questions mentioned in
their assigned task descriptions, engaging in an average of nine con-
versational exchanges with ChatGPT. We present the key themes
of the Challenges that emerged from the interviews.
C1. Response Content is Verbose and Lacks Structure. Par-
ticipants expressed concerns over ChatGPT’s explanations and
commented that “it was definitely very easy to get overwhelmed by
information thrown at [them] sometimes” (P2). Even if the questions
were intentionally framed with a specific scope for short responses,
ChatGPT provided long answers (P5). If participants sensed that
ChatGPT was generating a redundant response with extraneous
background information, they tended to click ‘Stop generating’ but-
ton (P3). When participants asked a follow-up question, many made
similar comments that “ChatGPT tends to repeat the whole thing, and
[they] would have to skim over some stuff that [they] already know”
(P5). It was clear that “ChatGPT was trying to be as exhaustive as
possible answering [their] questions” (P2).
Regarding the format of the information presented, P3 found
bullet-point content was easier to understand. P5 commented that
“there’s not really a visual hierarchy in the text, ”making it difficult to
navigate a large amount of text. Participants suggested functionali-
ties to circumvent these issues, including being able to see“different
formats” (P3), having information management capabilities, like
collapse (P6), and shortening parts to prevent repetition (P5).
C2. Lack of Flexible Interaction with the Response Text. All
participants extracted some parts of the ChatGPT responses and
tried to query them as a prompt to explore them further. However,
they expressed the desire to interact with the response directly
rather than through a series of conversations. For example, P2
wished they could highlight a part of the ChatGPT response and
directly ask “Oh, what does this line mean?” . If participants were
unsure of certain parts of the response, they had to manually write
it down, or copy-paste from the original text, and prompt each
question one by one to get clarification, which is time-consuming
and “increases [their] mental load” (P9).
C3. Lack of Organization Across Multiple Responses. Keeping
track of the various questions and answers previously encountered
was found challenging for all participants, as P1 noted that they
“struggled a little bit to like remember everything. ” This was further
exacerbated by “redundant answers [that] lack organization” and
form a single stream of questions and answers (P3).
Almost all participants wanted the ability to organize the in-
formation collected during the multiple back-and-forth exchanges.
Due to a lack of organization, P5 had to “scroll through a lot” to
find relevant information in a previous response, and suggested
a bookmarking technique that would enable them to “annotate
stuff that you want to go back to later. ” P2 suggested providing an
overview of what information has been explored with bullet points.
Alternatively, P2 and P4 recommended organizing the responses
spatially in a mind-map form that visualizes “the connections or
the relations between the questions [they] ask, ” which will be “very
useful in terms of understanding the whole topic” (P2).
3.3 Summary
The formative study reveals that the participants found several chal-
lenges with respect to the quantity, organization, and presentation
of, and interaction with the ChatGPT responses. They found the
responses to be verbose, making them difficult to track, process,
and comprehend. The linear conversation contributes to the disor-
ganization of the information embedded in a series of exchanges
with ChatGPT. Additionally, there is no direct interactive control
over textual responses, which makes it hard for users to specify
their intent in follow-up prompts. Overall, the findings indicate that
a better representation of information is needed to enable intuitive
understanding and flexible exploration of information from LLMs.
4 DESIGN GOALS AND RATIONALE
Based on findings from the formative study and the iterative pro-
totyping and evaluation process, we derive four design goals for
a diagram-oriented interaction with LLMs. We first describe the
Design goals, and then a scenario (Section 5) to ground how these
goals can be supported by a novel system and lead to fluid interac-
tion with LLM-generated information.
D1. Diagram as Entry Point. Our goal was to use diagrams to
facilitate the comprehension of LLM responses. However, we found
first presenting text from LLMs, and then displaying the diagrams
generated from the text, increases rather than decreases the cogni-
tive effort. This is because LLMs, especially GPT-4, take significant
time to generate complete and comprehensive responses(C1). Users
read the responses in real-time as the text comes out, and therefore,
presenting full diagrams subsequently requires extra time to pro-
cess. Moreover, the diagrams may not match users’ preconceived
mental picture, imposing an additional burden on the short-term
memory to align the concepts absorbed through reading with dia-
grams that come afterward. Prior research has also explored how
different types of visuals, such as diagrams and charts, can serve
as simultaneous and preferred facilitators for various text-oriented
tasks, including reading and chatting [27, 41, 46, 51, 76, 77].

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Therefore, we propose generating diagrams concurrently with
the text and ensuring diagrams are the entry point to the LLM-
generated information to aid comprehension.
D2. Flexible Control of Diagram Complexity. Diagrams can
be difficult to understand if they are overly complicated. There-
fore, it is essential to manage the complexity of diagrams. The
perceived complexity of a diagram can come from two sources: the
amount of information in the original text (C1) and the presenta-
tion mechanism of the diagrams. To avoid overwhelming the users
with complexity, the users should be able to flexibly control the
amount of information to be visualized in the diagram and how the
available information should be revealed.
D3. Diagram-Based Exploration. By utilizing diagrams as the
main interface with LLMs, typical information tasks should be
supported through interaction with the nodes and links in these
diagrams (C2), which has been proven effective in improving in-
formation tasks [38, 75]. Users should be able to interact with the
diagram to acquire more information, such as further exploring an
unfamiliar concept by requesting more explanations or examples.
Similarly, users should be able to collapse or trim parts of the dia-
grams if they are irrelevant to their goal. Explorations beyond the
initial prompt and response should be organized through expanding
and trimming of the diagrams (C3).
D4. Synchronized Interaction Between Diagrams and Text.
From our informal user tests during system development, we found
users often refer back to the original text for two reasons. Firstly,
although node-link diagrams help users quickly grasp the main con-
cepts and connections, they may need to consult the original text for
details about specific concepts or relationships they find intriguing
or challenging to understand from the diagrams. Secondly, since
we use GPT-4 to identify entities and relationships for diagram
construction, occasional recognition errors can result in inaccurate
visualizations. In these cases, users rely on the original text to verify
their understanding and to correct misconceptions. Therefore, we
propose that the text and diagrams remain synchronized, allowing
users to easily locate relevant text from the diagrams and vice versa
to leverage the combined strengths of different representations and
ensure an efficient information-processing experience [2].
5 ENVISIONED SCENARIO
We describe a scenario that illustrates the workflow of Grapho-
logue, a system to support the above design goals for exploratory
information seeking.
While working on a deadline, Margaret felt a tremor and con-
firmed a 4.5 magnitude earthquake online. Living in an earthquake
zone but lacking knowledge about them, she wanted to use Chat-
GPT, a tool that she had been using lately, to learn more about
earthquakes. However, weary from hours of writing, she preferred
a quicker way to understand the topic. She recently heard about
Graphologue, a tool that converts LLM text responses into diagrams
for easier comprehension, and decided to give it a shot.
In Graphologue, she started by typing ‘What is an earthquake?’.
As response text streamed into the interface from the LLM, she
noticed a node-link diagram was being constructed piece by piece
on the side simultaneously (D1). By glancing at the diagram, she
quickly understood that ‘tectonic plates’ - (‘shift along’) - ‘faulty
line’ and - (‘generates’) - ‘seismic waves. ’ As a scientist, she wanted
to ensure the logical relationship was correct. When she pointed to
‘seismic waves, ’ she noticed the corresponding text was highlighted,
allowing her to easily refer to the original text for full details (D4).
In the next diagram, she saw ‘Richter Scale, ’ which measures the
intensity of earthquakes, and wanted to know the earthquakes that
measured ‘Magnitude 7. ’ She clicked on the ‘Magnitude 7’ node
and then the ‘Examples’ button, and noticed more connections
and nodes forming from the node, listing three prior earthquakes,
including the ‘2010 Haiti earthquake’ (D3). Seeing that, she recalled
the devastating damages of that earthquake that she saw on TV.
Each paragraph and its corresponding diagram explain one par-
ticular aspect of the earthquake, allowing her to gain information
about the earthquake piece by piece (D2). After she went through
all these diagrams, she wanted to know how these concepts are
related together as a whole. She switched to the “merged diagram”
view, and immediately she saw all the smaller diagrams animate
and combine into one diagram showing the complete picture (D2).
She then said to herself, “This is groundbreaking. ”
6 PROMPTING FOR DIAGRAM GENERATION
A primary design goal for Graphologue is to have diagrams as
the entry point for people to receive information from LLMs (D1).
The common prompt chaining strategy, however, requires addi-
tional rounds of processing and leads to increased waiting time for
the user [87, 88]. To enable the diagrams to be constructed simul-
taneously as the response streams in, we iteratively develop our
prompts to have the LLM annotate the entities and relationships
inline with the tokens. This enables Graphologue to provide both
the text responses and the diagrams at the same time.
We develop and test the following prompting strategies with
OpenAI’s GPT-4, the most advanced and publicly available LLM to
date. A full list of original prompts can be found in Appendix A.
6.1 Diagram Construction
We outline our key prompt components, which work together to
instruct GPT-4 to generate an initial response that facilitates dy-
namic diagram construction (D1) and enables easy control over
the complexity of presented information (D2) through interactive
diagrams (Appendix A.1).
6.1.1 Dividing Responses into Paragraphs. Smaller and more man-
ageable diagrams, based on portions of the response, effectively
prevent users from being overwhelmed by an excessive number of
nodes and connections in a single diagram derived from the full
response. To achieve this, we instruct GPT-4 to structure its initial
response into separate paragraphs, each focusing on a single theme,
aspect, or topic, and corresponding with one diagram (Figure 3.b).
Interacting with separate diagrams allows users to navigate through
different sections of the response more easily, resulting in reduced
information overload and improved comprehension.
6.1.2 Annotating Entities. GPT-4 is instructed to annotate entities
in the text to serve as nodes in the diagrams. While entity labeling

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
[AI systems ($N1)]   
[AI systems ($N1)]   can be   [divided int o ($H, $N1, $N9, $H, $N1, $N10)]
[AI systems ($N1)]   can be   [divided int o ($H, $N1, $N9, $H, $N1, $N10)]   [narr ow AI ($N9)]   and   [gener al AI ($N10)]  .
E n t i t y  l a b e l
E n t i t y  i d
R e l a t i o n s h i p  l a b e l
R e l a t i o n s h i p  c o n n e c t i o nR e l a t i o n s h i p  s a l i e n c y
S k i p p e d  t o k e n sE n t i t i e s R e l a t i o n s h i p s
Original r esponse (A nnotated view) Render ed diagr am
P arsed r esponse (Default view)
AI systems
AI systems can be divided int o
AI systems can be divided int o narr ow AI and gener al AI. AI systems divided int o
narr ow AI
gener al AI
AI systems divided int o
...
...
AI systems
Figure 2: As GPT-4 responses stream in, Graphologue parses them in real-time, removes inline annotations for the interface,
extracts entities and relationships, and constructs the corresponding diagrams.
and co-reference resolution are classic tasks in NLP, traditional NLP
techniques struggle to perform well without complete sentences
[68]. However, we found GPT-4 excels in annotating the entities
simultaneously during the text generation , as shown in Figure 2.
We instruct GPT-4 to assign a unique identifier (such as $N1
in [Artificial Intelligence (AI) ($N1)] ) for each entity
referring to the same concept, i.e., co-reference, to enable entities to
be associated by the relationships. GPT-4 has surprisingly superior
co-reference capabilities and manages identifiers automatically,
avoiding repetition and ensuring consistent labeling throughout the
response. As shown in the example paragraph A in Appendix A.1,
Artificial Intelligence (AI) , AI systems , and It were all
co-referenced and identified as $N1.
6.1.3 Annotating Relationships and Saliency. In addition to entities,
we prompt GPT-4 to identify and annotate relationships between
these entities inline (Figure 2). These relationships serve as thelinks
in the node-link diagram. A single relationship described in the text
may encompass multiple connections between different pairs of
entities, and GPT-4 is instructed to include them in a single annota-
tion, which we utilize to organize the connections together when
rendering them on the canvas (like “such as” in Figure 3.c). GPT-4
demonstrates an impressive ability to identify nearly all relation-
ships and associate the corresponding entities with annotations.
However, annotating all relationships can result in the inclusion
of less important ones in the text, which may hinder users from
grasping the main idea and nature of the original response. Conse-
quently, this may lead to information overload and clutter when
rendered as a diagram. To avoid this, we leverage saliency filters
to manage the complexity of the rendered diagram. We instruct
GPT-4 to annotate each relationship pair with saliency levels for the
connections, designated as either high ($H) or low ($L). By default,
we render the diagram with only the high-saliency relationships to
mitigate clutter, while the user can adjust the saliency level control
on the interface to show all relationships.
One intriguing aspect of relationship annotations is GPT-4’s
ability to prospectively annotate the involved entities. Even before
an entity has been mentioned and labeled in the response, the
connecting relationship annotation already incorporates its iden-
tifier (Figure 2). This allows us to add new nodes to the existing
diagram structure before the corresponding node entities have
finished streaming in. Instead, a placeholder node will appear to
help draw the user’s attention, enabling a more fine-grained and
responsive unveiling of the dynamically constructed diagrams.
6.2 Error Prevention and Correction
GPT-4 demonstrates powerful inline annotation capabilities. Nev-
ertheless, it is not perfect and occasionally makes mistakes. We
develop our prompts and interactions of Graphologue to prevent
and correct the errors in GPT-4 annotations.
6.2.1 Avoiding Recurring Problems. As we develop the prompt-
ing rules mentioned above, we identify several common errors
made by GPT-4, which resulted in impaired response time, redun-
dant information, non-parsable responses, or incorrect diagrams.
These problems include assistant-style responses (e.g., “Sure, I can
help you with it... ”), inconsistent annotation formats (e.g., missing
square brackets), misidentifying conjunctive adverbs as entities
(e.g., “therefore” or “since then”), and repeating tokens inside and
outside of the annotation (e.g., narrow AI [narrow AI ($N9)] ).
We iteratively tune our prompts to explicitly avoid these behaviors
and instruct GPT-4 to respond concisely and consistently.
6.2.2 Self-Correction with Additional Rounds of Processing. Two
other types of annotation errors in recognizing entities and rela-
tionships are addressed through additional rounds of prompting:

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Figure 3: The Graphologue interface, including the question input box (a), text response blocks (b), and the diagrams (c). The
user can switch between the default split-diagram and merged-diagram views (1), modify the saliency filter (to show all or only
high saliency ones) (2), toggle showing the raw GPT-4 response with annotations or the parsed text (3), and change the text
block display between Original, Outline, and Summary (4). When a user hovers on a node in the diagram (6), all co-referenced
nodes and their corresponding text tokens are highlighted (5).
dead-end relationships, which involve annotating relationships that
connect non-existent entities; andorphan entities, which include an-
notating entities that are not involved in any relationships within
the rest of the response. These mistakes result in empty nodes
(nodes with no labels, showing “... ” instead) and orphan nodes (nodes
disconnected from the rest of the diagram), which hinder the user’s
ability to follow and digest the diagram for information compre-
hension. To address these issues, we identify such errors upon
completing each paragraph and prompt GPT-4 to self-correct these
inconsistencies, asking for a corrected version of each sentence that
contains errors one by one.
In the self-correction prompt, the previously generated para-
graph serves as context. We pinpoint the specific sentence requiring
correction and dynamically describe the issue, e.g., “entities labeled
$N11 and $N12 are mentioned but lack connecting relationships. ”
We instruct GPT-4 to re-annotate the sentence or slightly rewrite it
if needed for better annotation (Appendix A.2).
The correction process is done in parallel, and other interactions
with the diagram remain unblocked. Once an updated annotation
is complete, the diagram is adjusted and animated to reflect the
changes. We found that GPT-4 is able to improve the annotation
and correct many errors when asked again with issues directly
pointed out [72], and we allow users to modify the graph further
as needed, which we introduce in Section 7.3.3.
6.3 Information Quantity Adjustment
We limit the initial response from GPT-4 to fewer than four para-
graphs, each containing around 2–3 sentences. This would allow
the users to use simple diagrams as the starting point of the inter-
active exploration process without being overwhelmed by complex
diagrams. From the initial diagrams, however, the amount of in-
formation can be further adjusted, resulting in response text and
diagrams of varying lengths and levels of complexity, allowing
users to flexibly reduce the amount of information or delve into
more detailed and elaborate content as desired (D2).
6.3.1 Summarizing Each Paragraph of the Response. Saliency filter-
ing helps prevent overwhelming users with excessive information,
but sometimes they may want to quickly grasp the most important
idea of each paragraph for a brief understanding of the response.
To enable this, we prompt GPT-4 to generate a short, one-sentence
summary for each paragraph immediately after it is completed.
This captures the key concept, and the corresponding diagram is
simplified to include only 3–5 nodes, allowing for a concise and
easily digestible view. (Figure 4).
Maintaining the identifiers of entities present in the original text
and the summary is crucial for enabling smooth diagram transi-
tions between different levels of complexity and retaining context
for users to digest. To achieve this, we provide GPT-4 with the
annotated response when prompting for summaries. This approach

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
Figure 4: The original response (a) and its summary (b) from GPT-4, with the corresponding diagrams.
ensures that the same entities are matched across different text
and diagrams, allowing for synchronized interactions between the
diagram and the text, as introduced in Section 7.2.
6.3.2 Asking for More Details. Being able to customize the content
based on individual needs and interests facilitates engagement and
in-depth understanding at varied levels and scales [13]. We allow
users to request more information about the response, including
expanding specific paragraphs of the response (Figure 6.b) with
additional explanations or examples, as well as introducing new
paragraphs and corresponding diagrams that explore additional
aspects of the subject matter (Figure 6.c).
7 GRAPHOLOGUE INTERFACE
Graphologue transforms textual responses from LLM into interac-
tive diagrams, utilizing entity and relationship annotations streamed
and interleaved with the original response. Below, we describe the
rich interactions powered by LLM and Graphologue’s interface.
7.1 Constructing the Interactive Diagrams
To enable users to utilize the node-link diagrams as the entry point
for their comprehension, it is essential to have these diagrams re-
sponsively updated as new entities and relationships are identified.
To accomplish this, we parse the text streamed in from GPT-4 and
immediately add new entities and relationships to diagrams as
they are generated. This ensures that users have a responsive and
up-to-date visual representation of the LLM-generated information.
The diagrams are designed to closely reflect the underlying an-
notated text. Several design choices are made to facilitate this goal.
For example, when multiple entities are extracted with the same
identifier through co-reference understanding, we use the longest
token as the node label in the diagram, as it may contain the most
information about the concept. When an annotated relationship
describes a connection involving an entity that has not yet been
streamed in from the response, we add a placeholder node indi-
cating the incoming entity. Once the actual entity comes in, the
placeholder node transforms into a real node (Figure 2), allowing
responsive construction of the diagram.
7.2 Bidirectional Synchronization
Graphologue’s diagram view serves as a rich and interactive in-
terface for users to comprehend and explore information. How-
ever, users may occasionally need to refer back to the original
textual response for details or to verify entities and relationships
that may have been inaccurately extracted and visualized. To fa-
cilitate these processes, entity and relationship annotation infor-
mation is stored and synchronized across different blocks of text
and diagrams. When a user hovers over a node in the diagram, all
co-referenced nodes in other individual diagrams are highlighted,
as are the corresponding entities in the text and their originating
sentences. This allows the user to quickly locate the term in the
original response (Figure 3.5). Hovering over the edges in the di-
agram highlights the relationship tokens in the original response.
Additionally, when a user selects a node, it highlights itself and
the connecting edges in the diagram, which in turn highlights the
corresponding set of tokens in the text response.
On the other hand, as users read the textual response to gain a
detailed explanation of their topic of interest, they may switch to
the diagram view from time to time to guide their comprehension
of the long and unstructured text, for which they need to quickly
locate the relevant node in the diagram. To support this, when the
mouse cursor is hovering on the text, the corresponding nodes
and relationships in the diagram are highlighted to enable quick
navigation, as shown in Figure 6.a.
Users can collapse nodes to mitigate information overload as they
progressively interact with the diagram (Section 7.3.2). When a node
is collapsed, text tokens corresponding to the hidden leaf nodes
are greyed out to reduce visual saliency compared to other parts of

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Figure 5: The Outline (a) and Summary (b) views.
Figure 6: When a user hovers over an entity or relationship
text token, it highlights itself, the co-references, and the
corresponding nodes in the diagram (a). Hovering at the bot-
tom of the text block reveals a “tell me more” button, which
expands the paragraph (b). Clicking on “add a paragraph”
button after the last text block prompts adding a new para-
graph to the current response (c).
the response that correspond to active nodes in the diagram. This
allows users to focus on important parts of the text and the diagram
while minimizing distractions and clutter from less pertinent or
uninterested information from both ends.
7.3 Interaction with Diagram Nodes
Graphologue emphasizes using diagrams as the entry point and pri-
mary interface to gain information from LLMs, supporting various
information tasks to enhance user engagement and understanding,
such as exploring unfamiliar concepts by accessing more detailed
explanations and examples, and removing irrelevant content to
focus on the most pertinent information.
7.3.1 Continuous Exploration Through Explanation and Examples.
The initial response from LLMs about an unfamiliar topic to the
user could introduce more unfamiliar related concepts, for which
they need to ask follow-up questions. Structuring the follow-up
responses as diagrams and merging them in situ with the existing
diagram allows contextual exploration and seamless integration of
new information, which helps users understand the new concepts
with the help of the existing diagrams. Graphologue thus supports
node-oriented exploration on top of the existing diagrams.
When a user encounters an unfamiliar concept in the diagram,
they can select it and navigate to the Explain or Examples menu
options to make a follow-up prompt for GPT-4 to generate an expla-
nation or a few examples about the concept (Figure 7). The response
text is directly appended to the end of the existing paragraph, and
newly extracted entities and relationships are either co-referenced
and assigned an existing identifier or cumulatively added to the
diagram as new nodes and links.
7.3.2 Reduced Information Overload Through Node Collapsing. In
addition to gaining more information about a specific node, a user
may want to remove the uninterested information or reduce the
complexity of the diagrams. To achieve this, Graphologue enables
users to collapse and hide all leaf nodes of a diagram node, helping
them concentrate on their areas of interest and proceed with their
exploration in a less cluttered environment.
7.3.3 User-Initiated Correction Through Trimming and Merging.
Even with the powerful GPT-4 and the complex prompts we use,
incorrect labeling of entities and relationships still occurs. As the
user explores, these errors accumulate and make the diagrams
harder to follow and understand. To address this, GPT-4 supports
the users to manually correct the errors if needed.
When a user finds a node is incorrectly extracted, e.g., a conjunc-
tive adverb is identified as an entity, they can select the node and
use the Trim menu option to remove the entity from the diagram.
As a result, relationships associating it with others and their inline
annotations in the original response are also removed. When they
identify two entities referring to the same concept but are not co-
referenced correctly and are rendered as two nodes in the diagram,
they can easily merge them by dragging one node on top of the
other (to be merged as), after which the connecting relationships
and their annotations will also be changed.
7.4 Diagram-Level Information Managing
While the diagram representation and a wide range of interactions
supported by Graphologue effectively help users view information
from LLMs in a structured and progressive way, the user can still
be overwhelmed with a large amount of information and entity
relationships contained in lengthy paragraphs. As introduced above,
several diagram-level controls are introduced to help manage the
information display complexity, including dividing responses into
paragraphs, relationship saliency, and summary (Figure 4.b). The
text blocks can also be switched to the Outline view that structures
the plain text content with headings and bulleted lists (Figure 5.a).
The underlining Markdown text is generated upon completion of
each paragraph through prompt chaining, in parallel with self-
correction for annotations and summarization (Appendix A.2–A.4).
Conversely, if users find the provided information to be insuf-
ficient, they have the option to request additional details for each
aspect (Figure 6.b), or request the inclusion of more aspects related
to the given topic (Figure 6.c).

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
Figure 7: When the user is unfamiliar with the term ‘Earth’s crust, ’ they select the corresponding node in the diagram and click
the ‘Explain’ button (a). This action generates a new segment of the diagram branching from the selected node, where the user
can continue exploring examples and explanations of the new concepts (b).
Figure 8: A merged diagram with a highlighted text block (a), whose entity nodes are highlighted in the diagram (b).
7.5 Merging Diagrams
Dividing GPT-4’s raw response into different paragraphs and build-
ing a separate diagram for each of them effectively reduces informa-
tion complexity and allows easy navigation and themed exploration.
However, this structure is less helpful when users want to under-
stand the relationships between aspects of the answer and get a
holistic view of the topic, e.g., how a bird’s lightweight body struc-
ture and respiratory system work cohesively to enable flight, or how
Elon Musk’s managing styles differ across his various companies.
Graphologue supports merging individual diagrams into one
diagram for examination and integration (Figure 8). The merging
and splitting transition is animated to help users gain context for
the individual and merged diagrams. When the user hovers over
each of the text blocks, the corresponding nodes in the merged
diagram get highlighted. If the user only wants to examine a subset
of paragraphs, they can hide the others from the merged diagram,
allowing any combination of diagrams to be merged and viewed.
After the part gets hidden, Graphologue automatically updates
and animates the layout of the rest of the diagram to ensure an
optimized and efficient view for the users.
8 TECHNICAL EV ALUATION
To gain a preliminary understanding of GPT-4’s inline entity and
relationship annotation ability, we conducted a small-scale technical
evaluation to assess the accuracy of GPT-4 inline annotations.
8.1 Setup
The goal of the evaluation is to assess the performance of our
prompts with GPT-4 (model gpt-4-0314) in terms of initial inline
entity and relationship annotations, as well as subsequent correc-
tions. To achieve this, we simulated interactions with the system
by utilizing GPT-4 to respond to a wide range of topics, following
our prompting strategy. We then manually examined all the entity
and relationship annotations in both the initial and self-corrected
responses separately to gauge the system’s performance.
8.1.1 Topics. We developed a corpus with GPT-4 using a two-step
method. Initially, we requested GPT-4 to generate a list of fifty areas
encapsulating various facets of human knowledge (e.g., history,
psychology, engineering, etc.). Subsequently, we prompted GPT-4
to provide responses on specific topics within each of these areas
(e.g., The history of botanical gardens, Gamification). Following

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Table 1: Technical Evaluation Results2
Before
Correction % After One Round
of Correction %
Word Count 4360 4382
Node
Annotation
Total Entity Phrases 1091 1103
Total Extracted Entity Phrases 1086 1106
Correct Extracted Entity Phrases 1043 1074
Erroneous Extracted Entity Phrases 43 32
Performance
Precision 96.04% 97.11%
Recall 95.60% 97.37%
F-score 95.82% 97.24%
Error Types
Missing Entity Phrase 48 4.40% 29 2.63%
Incorrect Entity 12 1.10% 13 1.18%
Incomplete Entity 22 2.02% 11 1.00%
Incorrect Co-reference 9 0.82% 8 0.73%
Relationship
Annotation
Total Relationships 825 843
Total Extracted Relationships 718 813
Correct Extracted Relationships 654 765
Erroneous Extracted Relationships 64 48
Performance
Precision 91.09% 94.10%
Recall 79.27% 90.75%
F-score 84.77% 92.39%
Error Types
Missing Relationship 171 20.73% 78 9.25%
Dead-end Relationship 37 4.48% 27 3.20%
Reversed Relationship 12 1.45% 10 1.19%
Incomplete Relationship 8 0.97% 7 0.83%
Misattributed Relationship 7 0.85% 4 0.47%
Detectable Errors Orphan Nodes 133 12.25% 38 3.44%
Dead-end Relationships 37 4.48% 27 3.20%
this, we amalgamated each topic with the Graphologue’s prompt
(Appendix A.1) to collect the annotated responses.
8.1.2 Error Coding. Three coders participated in the evaluation.
Coders examined the annotations of each text response from GPT-4
and noted all incorrect annotations. An error taxonomy (Appen-
dix B) was iteratively established during the evaluation. While inter-
coder reliability was not collected, each annotation was examined
by two coders independently to minimize oversights.
Besides syntactic errors, semantic errors were also identified.
For example, Reversed Relationship errors indicate instances where
the entity relationships were incorrectly inverted. We found that,
given a sentence, GPT-4 could produce different annotations at
varied levels of granularity. For example, with this short phrase
“the goal of the evaluation, ”GPT-4 could produce two different an-
notations, such as [the goal ($N1)] [of ($L, $N1, $N2)]
[the evaluation ($N2)] or [the goal of the evaluation
($N1)]. When examining the annotations, as long as they were
semantically correct, regardless of the granularity, we accepted
them as correct annotations.
2Detailed explanation and examples of the error types can be found in Appendix B.
8.1.3 Initial and Self-Corrected Responses. In response to all 50
queries, GPT-4 cumulatively returned initial responses encompass-
ing 4360 words, 1086 annotated entity phrases, and 718 annotated
relationships. Errors that appear in the initial responses were ag-
gregated and listed in column Before Correction in Table 1.
Graphologue is capable of detecting Orphan Nodes (i.e., enti-
ties without any associated relationships, usually resulting from
Incorrect Entities or Incomplete Relationships) or Dead-end Re-
lationships (i.e., relationships attempting to connect non-existent
entities, typically due to Dead-end Relationships), as listed in rows
Detectable Errors (errors that can be detected by Graphologue) in
Table 1. When errors are detected, GPT-4 can conduct a round of
corrections with GPT-4 using a correction prompt (Appendix A.2).
We combined the corrected responses with initial responses that
didn’t include these errors. The total dataset contained 4382 words
(the system is instructed to rewrite the sentence if necessary), 1106
annotated entity phrases, and 813 annotated relationships. Errors
that emerged in these responses were consolidated and presented
in column After One Round of Correction in Table 1).

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
8.2 Key Findings
We consolidate our primary observations pertaining to the initial
annotating performance and the improvements observed after a
single round of correction.
8.2.1 Initial Annotation Performance (Before Correction). For en-
tity annotation, we observe an F-score of 95.82%. For relationship
annotation, we note an F-score of 84.77%. The majority of errors in
entity annotation arise due to Missing Entity Phrases (𝑛 = 48) and
Incomplete Entities (𝑛 = 22). Conversely, the bulk of errors in rela-
tionship annotations results from Missing Relationships (𝑛 = 171)
and Dead-end Relationships ( 𝑛 = 37). The annotated responses
include 133 Orphan Nodes (attributable to Incorrect Entities or
Misattributed Relationships) and 37 Dead-end Relationships.
8.2.2 Annotation Performance with One Round of Correction. Upon
correction, the precision for entity annotation improves to 97.11%
(increases 1.07%), and the recall rises to 97.37% (increases 1.77%),
resulting in an F-score of 97.24%. For relationship annotations, we
notice a precision of 94.10% (increases 3.01%) and a recall of 90.75%
(increases 11.48%), resulting in an F-score of 92.39%. The numbers
of Orphan Nodes and Dead-end Relationships drop to 38 and 27,
respectively. Most errors in entity annotations stem from Missing
and Incorrect Entities. Similarly, for relationship annotations, most
errors originate from Missing and Dead-end Relationships.
8.3 Summary
In summary, the technical evaluation results suggest that the anno-
tation and correction prompts employed by Graphologue reliably
execute entity and relationship annotation tasks with our prompt-
ing and self-correction strategies. Specifically, they achieve an F-
score of 97.24% for entity annotation, and an F-score of 92.39% for
relationship annotation, with one round of correction.
9 USER EV ALUATION
The primary goal of this project is to investigate the potential bene-
fits of leveraging graphical representations for textual information
from LLMs. This approach aims to address many of their limita-
tions and enhance user interactions, especially during exploratory
information-seeking tasks. In order to assess the efficacy of this
novel approach, we conducted a user evaluation.
9.1 Participants
We recruited seven experienced users of ChatGPT to evaluate
Graphologue. To ensure their level of experience, we requested
participants to share screenshots of their ChatGPT history, en-
abling us to gauge the complexity of the prompts they typically
used. Each participant was compensated with 30 USD for one hour
of their participation.
9.2 Setup
We conducted all sessions remotely using Zoom, with Graphologue
deployed on a cloud server for participants to access. We recorded
the audio and screen activity during each session, subsequently
transcribing these records to facilitate inductive qualitative analysis
using the thematic analysis method [12].
9.3 Procedure
A study session consisted of four steps.
9.3.1 Introduction (5 minutes). The interviewer briefly introduced
the goal of the project and study and presented four potential topics
for exploration: Neuro-divergence, Supply and Demand, Northern
Lights, and Inflation. The participant was then asked to select one
of these subjects of interest.
9.3.2 System Training (10 minutes). The interviewer proceeded
with a guided tour of all key features of Graphologue, with a stan-
dard example topic—Electric Vehicles. This step aimed to familiarize
participants with Graphologue interface and functionalities.
9.3.3 System Interaction (20 minutes). Participants were guided to
use Graphologue in the completion of their tasks. Specifically, they
were tasked to gather information to prepare for a hypothetical
lecture. They were given the following prompt: “Imagine you are
a professor at a public university, and you are scheduled to deliver a
lecture on the topic of [selected topic]. Here is a list of concepts (three
related concepts and one question were provided for each topic) that
you aim to explain to your students by the end of the lecture. ”
9.3.4 Survey and Interview (20 minutes). Following the completion
of the tasks, participants filled out a survey that consisted of ques-
tions designed to gauge their perceptions of the system’s usefulness
and the utility of its multiple representations of information. Each
question was rated on a 5-point Likert scale (1—strongly disagree,
and 5—strongly agree). Later, we conducted an interview wherein
participants were prompted to draw comparisons between their
current experience with Graphologue and their prior interactions
with ChatGPT in the context of knowledge acquisition tasks. The
purpose was to identify how our system addresses the challenges
that typically arise when using ChatGPT.
9.4 Results
We share the results of our user evaluation, detailing the effec-
tiveness of Graphologue in facilitating the understanding of in-
formation, managing the complexity of diagrams, and the distinct
workflows when interacting with typical LLMs and Graphologue.
We also discuss the identified limitations of the current system.
U n d e r s t a n d  R e l a t i o n s h i p s1
2
3
4
5
6
7
L o c a t e  E n t i t i e s
C o n c i s e  P r e s e n t a t i o n
C o n t r o l  C o m p l e x i t y
F u r t h e r  E x p l o r a t i o n
M u l t i p l e  R e p r e s e n t a t i o n s
O u t l i n e  V i e w
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
S t r o n g l y  A g r e e S t r o n g l y  D i s a g r e eA g r e e N e u t r a l D i s a g r e e
Figure 9: Participants’ responses to utility and usability of
Graphologue interface and various features, measured on a
5-point Likert scale.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
9.4.1 Graphologue Facilitates Information Comprehension. Partic-
ipants found that the node-link diagrams enhanced their under-
standing of the diverse relationships inherent in the topic they
explored (Figure 9.1). For instance, P5 stated that diagrams helped
“visualize the connections, ”and P4 suggested they aid in compre-
hending how different aspects connect. Participants particularly
praised the diagrams for providing an “overall view of a topic” and
for “understanding a set of instructions” (P8), likening it to a “mind
map” (P8), and stating that it provides an understanding of the
organization of information (P5). Conversely, they noted that con-
ventional text responses from LLMs can be“wordy, ”while diagrams
make it “faster to get the information” (P1).
The bidirectional mapping between the diagram and paragraph
through highlighting “is a good visual cue to get the users’ attention
to understand the various relationships” (P5) and helps users locate
and comprehend various terms and concepts from the diagram with
explanations easily (Figure 9.2).
9.4.2 Graphologue Provides Sufficient Control for Diagram Com-
plexity. Most participants found the amount of information pre-
sented in the responses to be concise (Figure 9.3), and they appreci-
ated the ability to control the level of detail they wished to see with
Graphologue (Figure 9.4). For instance, the presentation of smaller
diagrams for each individual paragraph was praised for helping
understand “what (was) happening within a single paragraph” (P7).
P1 expressed satisfaction with the degree of control they had over
the depth and breadth of information within each paragraph.
Participants responded favorably to the ability to split and merge
diagrams, recognizing that this functionality effectively supports
diverse information consumption goals. P1 highlighted the helpful-
ness of split diagrams when they “care about one particular para-
graph, ”while appreciating the merged diagram when they need to
“get the overall information of a particular topic. ” P2 suggested that
the capacity to flexibly switch between these views could assist
students in self-learning tasks, maintaining focus on both critical
details and the broader picture. P5 highlighted that merged view
offers insights beyond “standalone concepts. ”For example, when
exploring neuro-diversity, P7 used split diagrams to understand
lower-level concepts in detail, such as strategies to identify neuro-
divergence in individuals. Then, they used the merged diagram to
get an overview of how different strategies for identification can be
integrated. The ability to highlight parts enabled them to examine
how individual sections contributed to and were integrated within
the larger diagram (P1, P2, P5).
9.4.3 Graphologue Reduces Prompting Effort and Facilitates Ex-
ploration. While using ChatGPT, which often generates verbose
information, the burden is typically on the user to craft prompts
that control the length of the responses, for instance, ‘use less than
200 words. ’ With Graphologue, however, participants found the
extensive controls for managing complexity effectively reduced the
need for such directive prompts. As P1 noted, “there’s no need to
[specify] ‘make it brief, ’ cause you can just click on [the interface]. ”
Participants noted how Graphologue made it convenient to ex-
tract new information through interactions with the diagrams (Fig-
ure 9.5). Graphologue made it particularly easy to construct prompts
for creating examples and explanations during learning activities,
which can often be monotonous and time-consuming. As P1 noted,
with ChatGPT, users have to prompt“Please incorporate more exam-
ples about ‘this thing’ in your answer. ”However, with Graphologue,
acquiring context-specific examples is straightforward: “clicking
the ‘Examples’ button just does it, and (you) don’t have to think of
another prompt” (P5). Extending this point, P8 stated that following
a “chain”becomes simple without the need to write a prompt. P4,
for example, intended to understand the meaning of ‘particles’ in
“charged particles from the sun. ”They selected the node ‘particles’ in
the diagram and clicked the ‘Explain’ button. This action extended
the paragraph and constructed a new part of the diagram stemming
from the node, serving to clarify the context-specific meaning of
‘particles. ’ P4 proceeded to follow this process for many other terms
that emerged in the explanation, such as protons and atomic nuclei.
9.4.4 Graphologue Combines the Strengths of Multiple Representa-
tions. While the diagrams serve as the primary representation of
information, Graphologue also provides the original text, an out-
line, and a summary for each paragraph. Participants found these
alternative representations to have complementary strengths. For
instance, the outline view, formatted with headings and lists, effec-
tively organized and highlighted the key ideas in each paragraph
(Figure 9.7), like a “lecture slide”that significantly aids learning (P2).
Conversely, the diagrams offset the limitations of the outline view,
which simply enumerates points without showing their intercon-
nections. The diagrams, however, clearly illustrate the interactions
among the bulleted points and“how they relate back to the main idea”
(P4). P8 explored the concept of ‘marginal utility’ and found them-
selves trying to synthesize a variety of encompassed economics
jargon such as ‘total utility’ and ‘welfare programs. ’ They switched
the text block to the outline view, which, coupled with the dia-
gram, provided hierarchical and relational information detailing
how these terms function within the concept of ‘marginal utility. ’
Participants also found that the original text could fill in the
details missing from the diagrams. For instance, P1 enjoyed high-
lighting specific parts of the text they were interested in to get more
details, which then formed the basis when seeking additional infor-
mation. P5 reported that at times, it could be “a little intimidating if
you just see the whole diagram, ” and the synchronization between
the outline view and the diagram allowed them to use the outline
view as a way to filter out unnecessary nodes in the diagrams. These
examples not only illustrate the strengths and weaknesses of each
representation, but also show that participants could adaptively
employ, switch, and combine them for different use cases.
9.4.5 Limitations. Graphologue separates the response into smaller
paragraphs to reduce the complexity of diagrams. However, this
can lead to extensive use of screen space, and P5 suggested that they
need to do “a lot of scrolling” to view all the diagrams. While more
complex diagrams can be space-efficient, they might compromise
understanding. To address this inherent trade-off between diagram
complexity and spatial efficiency, in addition to merging all small
diagrams into one, future iterations of the system need to provide
more control for users to flexibly merge any selection of diagrams.
Some participants reported difficulties in understanding the dia-
grams when they did not match their mental models or included
an overwhelming amount of details. On the other hand, while text
responses from GPT-4 tend to be verbose, the text representation
does not immediately impose a mental structure and allows users to

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
gradually construct their own mental models while reading the text,
unlike diagrams. Graphologue alleviates this problem by providing
both the generated diagrams and the original text. This issue can
be further mitigated by enabling users to manipulate the diagrams
during generation to align the diagrams with their mental models.
Other limitations associated with the current interface design,
annotation performance, and user expertise were also identified.
P1 found the animations used to progressively augment diagrams
distracting. Some participants found the generation latency, due to
GPT-4’s performance, negatively impacted the experience. These
limitations can be addressed by employing smoother animation
effects, prompt engineering to minimize annotation errors, and
more responsive generative models. On the other hand, as partic-
ipants were allowed to choose the topic of their preference, they
invariably chose ones they were either ‘Familiar’ or ‘Very Familiar’
with. Future studies could focus on assessing how the system might
assist users of varying familiarity levels with a given topic.
9.4.6 Summary. The study findings demonstrate that the prompt-
ing techniques and the interface designs leveraged by Graphologue
offer a more direct representation of the concepts and their rela-
tionships, enhancing the comprehension of information from LLMs.
The rich and flexible control over the complexity of the diagrams,
along with the combination of the strengths of various representa-
tions provided by Graphologue, enabled participants to maintain
control over the amount of information they wished to consume
for diverse information-seeking goals and tasks.
10 DISCUSSION
Our user study findings highlight the benefits, limitations, and
opportunities of Graphologue, which employs graphical represen-
tation and enhanced interaction with LLM-generated information.
We discuss these aspects in detail below.
10.1 Improving Annotation Performance
While our technical evaluation demonstrates the advanced inline
annotation capabilities of GPT-4, especially with self-correction,
the final annotations still contain errors, such as relationships that
point to non-existent entities. These annotation errors can produce
misleading diagrams, for which the users need to cross-reference
the original text to alleviate their confusion.
Many approaches can be utilized to improve annotation perfor-
mance. For example, incorporating domain knowledge as references
for corresponding annotation tasks. Improved prompt designs in-
formed by new knowledge of LLMs could also help improve the
overall performance, e.g., assigning roles to the model for differ-
ent domain-specific tasks or providing more training examples. A
comparison with the traditional NLP methods in Named Entity
Recognition (NER) and Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) could reveal
potential LLM-specific biases in annotation, which could also guide
us in refining our prompting strategies [4, 61, 66]. On the other
hand, a more advanced and fine-tuned model could also lead to
improved annotation performance.
10.2 Prompting LLMs via Graphical Interfaces
The graphical user interface of Graphologue enables users to em-
ploy direct manipulation with the diagram to request explanations
and examples from LLMs, saving users’ efforts to manually craft
textual prompts. Future work could provide more options for inter-
acting with LLMs graphically. For example, the system can allow
users to select multiple disconnected nodes and build a new dia-
gram illustrating their connections, or summarize a branch of a
diagram with one higher-level concept. Moreover, a text input box
can be provided to allow customized requests. As the user explores
the knowledge space through the graphical interface, their prior
actions and the current diagram can be leveraged as context to
construct prompts for LLMs to get responses that are better aligned
with the user’s needs. For instance, when a user collapses a branch,
the subsequent prompts can incorporate text that indicates the
collapsed aspect is less relevant to the user’s present goal.
10.3 Supporting Applications Across Diverse
Domains
The node-link diagrams constructed by Graphologue, utilizing LLM
responses, are particularly helpful for tasks requiring a compre-
hensive understanding of diverse concepts and the interconnec-
tions among them, such as exploratory information seeking [65].
Participants from our user study identified several immediate ap-
plications of Graphologue, including education and professional
training. Future research could explore the application of Grapho-
logue’sreal-time diagram generation capabilities to other contexts
where node-link diagrams serve as a powerful visual facilitator. For
instance, in the context of group discussion, diagrams can be gener-
ated based on conversations to visualize the discussed concepts and
their connections, acting as a collective knowledge map to ground
and facilitate the discussions.
Information accuracy is critical to many applications, such as
academic literature reviews. However, current LLMs are prone
to “hallucination” and can generate factually incorrect text[5, 93].
Diagrams could help verify LLM-generated information by breaking
a large body of text into pieces that can be individually validated. For
example, a pair of connected nodes and their relationships could be
treated as a unit piece of information that can be validated against
external knowledge bases, and relationships of different degrees of
certainty can be visualized with different color intensities.
10.4 Exploring Representations Beyond
Node-Link Diagrams
A theme that surfaced in the user study is that although node-link
diagrams can serve as a suitable representation for understanding
interconnected concepts and relationships within LLM responses,
they might not always be optimal for a wide range of information
tasks [41]. Other formats, such as tables, storyboards, animations,
and flowcharts, can be more suitable representations for different
aspects of the information. For instance, a table can be clearer when
comparing different aspects of multiple concepts, and animations
can better illustrate dynamic processes [81]. Future research could
investigate how to annotate and construct such representation
formats and intelligently select the most suitable one according to
the context. Other systems could also explore creating connections
among these representations and offering ways for users to switch
between them as needed and desired.

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
11 CONCLUSION
LLMs such as GPT-4 have swiftly gained recognition and popu-
larity due to their unprecedented intelligence and potential for a
wide range of applications. Existing interfaces for LLMs, like Chat-
GPT, employ linear and text-based interfaces, often generating an
abundance of information. Our formative study identified three
challenges related to the limited usability, readability, and interac-
tivity of textual LLM responses. Graphologue, in contrast, leverages
dynamic and interactive diagrams as the primary interface for in-
teracting with LLMs. Our user study indicated that Graphologue
effectively addressed many limitations inherent in conversational
interfaces by offering flexible graphical representations that facili-
tated direct and adaptable graphical dialogue with LLMs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work would not be possible without the selfless and heart-
warming support of all the members of the Creativity Lab at UC
San Diego. Our deepest gratitude extends to Fuling Sun, who was
crucial in facilitating a productive drive toward the successful com-
pletion of this project. We would also like to thank Sangho Suh,
Bryan Min, Matthew Beaudouin-Lafon, and Jane E for helping with
the video figure production, and William Duan, Vidya Madhavan,
Tony Meng, Xiaoshuo Yao, and Juliet (Lingye) Zhuang for assis-
tance with the technical evaluation, as well as Brian Hempel and
Devamardeep Hayatpur for proofreading the paper draft. We thank
anonymous reviewers for their constructive and insightful reviews.
NSF grant #2009003 provided financial support.
REFERENCES
[1] Maneesh Agrawala, Wilmot Li, and Floraine Berthouzoz. 2011. Design principles
for visual communication. Commun. ACM 54, 4 (2011), 60–69.
[2] Shaaron Ainsworth. 2006. DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learn-
ing with multiple representations. Learning and Instruction 16, 3 (2006), 183–198.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2006.03.001
[3] Shaaron Ainsworth and Andrea Th Loizou. 2003. The effects of self-explaining
when learning with text or diagrams. Cognitive science 27, 4 (2003), 669–681.
[4] Tareq Al-Moslmi, Marc Gallofré Ocaña, Andreas L. Opdahl, and Csaba Veres.
2020. Named Entity Extraction for Knowledge Graphs: A Literature Overview.
IEEE Access 8 (2020), 32862–32881. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2973928
[5] Razvan Azamfirei, Sapna R Kudchadkar, and James Fackler. 2023. Large language
models and the perils of their hallucinations. Critical Care 27, 1 (2023), 1–2.
[6] Sriram Karthik Badam, Zhicheng Liu, and Niklas Elmqvist. 2018. Elastic docu-
ments: Coupling text and tables through contextual visualizations for enhanced
document reading. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 25, 1
(2018), 661–671.
[7] David Baidoo-Anu and Leticia Owusu Ansah. 2023. Education in the era of
generative artificial intelligence (AI): Understanding the potential benefits of
ChatGPT in promoting teaching and learning. A vailable at SSRN 4337484 (2023).
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4337484
[8] Jeff Baker, Donald Jones, and Jim Burkman. 2009. Using visual representations of
data to enhance sensemaking in data exploration tasks. Journal of the Association
for Information Systems 10, 7 (2009), 2.
[9] Benjamin B. Bederson and James D. Hollan. 1994. Pad++: A Zooming Graphical
Interface for Exploring Alternate Interface Physics. In Proceedings of the 7th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Marina del
Rey, California, USA) (UIST ’94). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 17–26. https://doi.org/10.1145/192426.192435
[10] Richard A. Bolt. 1980. “Put-That-There”: Voice and Gesture at the Graphics
Interface. In Proceedings of the 7th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and
Interactive Techniques (Seattle, Washington, USA) (SIGGRAPH ’80). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 262–270. https://doi.org/10.
1145/800250.807503
[11] Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier
Pietquin, Matt Sharifi, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, and
Neil Zeghidour. 2022. AudioLM: a Language Modeling Approach to Audio
Generation. arXiv:2209.03143 [cs.SD]
[12] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2012. Thematic analysis. American Psycho-
logical Association.
[13] Peter Brusilovsky. 2001. Adaptive hypermedia. User modeling and user-adapted
interaction 11 (2001), 87–110.
[14] Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric
Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha
Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. 2023. Sparks of Artificial
General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4. arXiv:2303.12712 [cs.CL]
[15] Alberto J. Cañas, Roger Carff, Greg Hill, Marco Carvalho, Marco Arguedas,
Thomas C. Eskridge, James Lott, and Rodrigo Carvajal. 2005. Concept Maps:
Integrating Knowledge and Information Visualization . Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 205–219. https://doi.org/10.1007/11510154_11
[16] Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay, and Ben Shneiderman (Eds.). 1999.Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
[17] Angel Chang, Will Monroe, Manolis Savva, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2015. Text to 3D Scene Generation with Rich Lexical Grounding.
arXiv:1505.06289 [cs.CL]
[18] Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, Jose Lezama, Lu Jiang,
Ming-Hsuan Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T. Freeman, Michael Rubinstein,
Yuanzhen Li, and Dilip Krishnan. 2023. Muse: Text-To-Image Generation via
Masked Generative Transformers. arXiv:2301.00704 [cs.CV]
[19] Kuo-En Chang, Yao-Ting Sung, and Ine-Dai Chen. 2002. The effect of concept
mapping to enhance text comprehension and summarization. The Journal of
Experimental Education 71, 1 (2002), 5–23.
[20] Chaomei Chen. 2010. Information visualization. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Computational Statistics 2, 4 (2010), 387–403.
[21] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de
Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg
Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf,
Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail
Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter,
Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex
Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shan-
tanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh
Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles
Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei,
Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating Large
Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs.LG]
[22] Zhutian Chen and Haijun Xia. 2022. CrossData: Leveraging Text-Data Connec-
tions for Authoring Data Documents. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 95, 15 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517485
[23] Peter C.-H. Cheng, Ric K. Lowe, and Mike Scaife. 2001. Cognitive Science Ap-
proaches To Understanding Diagrammatic Representations . Springer Netherlands,
Dordrecht, 79–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-3524-7_5
[24] Peggy Chi, Nathan Frey, Katrina Panovich, and Irfan Essa. 2021. Automatic
Instructional Video Creation from a Markdown-Formatted Tutorial. In The 34th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Virtual Event,
USA) (UIST ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
677–690. https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474778
[25] John Joon Young Chung, Wooseok Kim, Kang Min Yoo, Hwaran Lee, Eytan Adar,
and Minsuk Chang. 2022. TaleBrush: Visual Sketching of Story Generation with
Pretrained Language Models. In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI EA ’22).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 172, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519873
[26] Antoine Clarinval, Isabelle Linden, Anne Wallemacq, and Bruno Dumas. 2018.
Evoq: A Visualization Tool to Support Structural Analysis of Text Documents.
In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Document Engineering 2018 (Halifax,
NS, Canada) (DocEng ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, Article 27, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209280.3209533
[27] James M Clark and Allan Paivio. 1991. Dual coding theory and education. Edu-
cational psychology review 3 (1991), 149–210.
[28] Philip R. Cohen, Michael Johnston, David McGee, Sharon Oviatt, Jay Pittman, Ira
Smith, Liang Chen, and Josh Clow. 1997. QuickSet: Multimodal Interaction for
Distributed Applications. In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM International Conference
on Multimedia (Seattle, Washington, USA) (MULTIMEDIA ’97). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 31–40. https://doi.org/10.1145/
266180.266328
[29] Weiwei Cui, Xiaoyu Zhang, Yun Wang, He Huang, Bei Chen, Lei Fang, Haidong
Zhang, Jian-Guan Lou, and Dongmei Zhang. 2019. Text-to-viz: Automatic gener-
ation of infographics from proportion-related natural language statements. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics 26, 1 (2019), 906–916.

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
[30] Giulia Di Fede, Davide Rocchesso, Steven P. Dow, and Salvatore Andolina. 2022.
The Idea Machine: LLM-Based Expansion, Rewriting, Combination, and Sugges-
tion of Ideas. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Creativity and Cognition
(Venice, Italy) (C&C ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 623–627. https://doi.org/10.1145/3527927.3535197
[31] Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and
Anastasis Germanidis. 2023. Structure and Content-Guided Video Synthesis with
Diffusion Models. arXiv:2302.03011 [cs.CV]
[32] Ethan Fast, Binbin Chen, Julia Mendelsohn, Jonathan Bassen, and Michael S.
Bernstein. 2018. Iris: A Conversational Agent for Complex Tasks. In Proceedings
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal
QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174047
[33] Hendijanifard Fatemeh, Kardan Ahmad, and Dibay Moghadam Mohammad. 2011.
ICMAP: An interactive tool for concept map generation to facilitate learning
process. Procedia Computer Science 3 (2011), 524–529.
[34] Tong Gao, Mira Dontcheva, Eytan Adar, Zhicheng Liu, and Karrie G. Kara-
halios. 2015. DataTone: Managing Ambiguity in Natural Language Interfaces
for Data Visualization. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software & Technology (Charlotte, NC, USA) (UIST ’15). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 489–500. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807478
[35] Katy Ilonka Gero, Vivian Liu, and Lydia Chilton. 2022. Sparks: Inspiration for
Science Writing Using Language Models. In Designing Interactive Systems Confer-
ence (Virtual Event, Australia) (DIS ’22). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1002–1019. https://doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533533
[36] Charles Goodwin. 2015. Professional Vision. Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden,
Wiesbaden, 387–425. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-19381-6_20
[37] Stephen J Guastello, Mary Traut, and Gene Korienek. 1989. Verbal versus pictorial
representations of objects in a human-computer interface. International journal
of man-machine studies 31, 1 (1989), 99–120.
[38] Jungpil Hahn and Jinwoo Kim. 1999. Why Are Some Diagrams Easier to Work
with? Effects of Diagrammatic Representation on the Cognitive Intergration
Process of Systems Analysis and Design. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 6,
3 (sep 1999), 181–213. https://doi.org/10.1145/329693.329694
[39] Tessai Hayama and Shuma Sato. 2020. Supporting Online Video e-Learning
with Semi-automatic Concept-Map Generation. In Learning and Collaboration
Technologies. Designing, Developing and Deploying Learning Experiences . Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 64–76.
[40] Devamardeep Hayatpur, Daniel Wigdor, and Haijun Xia. 2023. CrossCode: Multi-
Level Visualization of Program Execution. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 593, 13 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581390
[41] Marti Hearst and Melanie Tory. 2019. Would You Like A Chart With That? Incor-
porating Visualizations into Conversational Interfaces. In 2019 IEEE Visualization
Conference (VIS). IEEE, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/VISUAL.2019.8933766
[42] Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei
Liu. 2022. AvatarCLIP: Zero-Shot Text-Driven Generation and Animation of 3D
Avatars. arXiv:2205.08535 [cs.CV]
[43] Mengdie Hu, Krist Wongsuphasawat, and John Stasko. 2017. Visualizing Social
Media Content with SentenTree.IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 23, 1 (2017), 621–630. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598590
[44] Gwo-Jen Hwang, Po-Han Wu, and Hui-Ru Ke. 2011. An interactive concept map
approach to supporting mobile learning activities for natural science courses.
Computers & education 57, 4 (2011), 2272–2280.
[45] Gwo-Jen Hwang, Li-Hsueh Yang, and Sheng-Yuan Wang. 2013. A concept map-
embedded educational computer game for improving students’ learning perfor-
mance in natural science courses. Computers & Education 69 (2013), 121–130.
[46] Yu-Cin Jian and Chao-Jung Wu. 2015. Using eye tracking to investigate semantic
and spatial representations of scientific diagrams during text-diagram integration.
Journal of Science Education and Technology 24 (2015), 43–55.
[47] Peiling Jiang, Fuling Sun, and Haijun Xia. 2023. Log-It: Supporting Program-
ming with Interactive, Contextual, Structured, and Visual Logs. In Proceedings
of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg,
Germany) (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
Article 594, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581403
[48] Dae Hyun Kim, Enamul Hoque, Juho Kim, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2018. Fa-
cilitating Document Reading by Linking Text and Tables. InProceedings of the
31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Berlin,
Germany) (UIST ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
423–434. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242587.3242617
[49] Yea-Seul Kim, Mira Dontcheva, Eytan Adar, and Jessica Hullman. 2019. Vo-
cal Shortcuts for Creative Experts. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300562
[50] Tiffany H Kung, Morgan Cheatham, Arielle Medenilla, Czarina Sillos, Lorie
De Leon, Camille Elepaño, Maria Madriaga, Rimel Aggabao, Giezel Diaz-Candido,
James Maningo, et al. 2023. Performance of ChatGPT on USMLE: Potential for
AI-assisted medical education using large language models. PLoS digital health 2,
2 (2023), e0000198.
[51] Philippe Laban, Tobias Schnabel, Paul Bennett, and Marti A. Hearst.
2021. Keep it Simple: Unsupervised Simplification of Multi-Paragraph Text.
arXiv:2107.03444 [cs.CL]
[52] Jill H Larkin and Herbert A Simon. 1987. Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth
ten thousand words. Cognitive science 11, 1 (1987), 65–100.
[53] Ching Liu, Juho Kim, and Hao-Chuan Wang. 2018. ConceptScape: Collabo-
rative Concept Mapping for Video Learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada)
(CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173961
[54] Michael Xieyang Liu, Andrew Kuznetsov, Yongsung Kim, Joseph Chee Chang,
Aniket Kittur, and Brad A. Myers. 2022. Wigglite: Low-Cost Information
Collection and Triage. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology (Bend, OR, USA) (UIST ’22). Associ-
ation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 32, 16 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3526113.3545661
[55] Vivian Liu and Lydia B Chilton. 2022. Design Guidelines for Prompt Engineering
Text-to-Image Generative Models. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 384, 23 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501825
[56] Stephen MacNeil, Andrew Tran, Juho Leinonen, Paul Denny, Joanne Kim, Arto
Hellas, Seth Bernstein, and Sami Sarsa. 2023. Automatically Generating CS
Learning Materials with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 54th ACM
Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 2 (Toronto ON, Canada)
(SIGCSE 2023). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1176.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3545947.3569630
[57] J.H. McClellan, L.D. Harvel, R. Velmurugan, M. Borkar, and C. Scheibe. 2004.
CNT: concept-map based navigation and discovery in a repository of learning
content. In 34th Annual Frontiers in Education, 2004. FIE 2004. IEEE, F1F–13.
https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE.2004.1408581
[58] Ronald Metoyer, Qiyu Zhi, Bart Janczuk, and Walter Scheirer. 2018. Coupling
Story to Visualization: Using Textual Analysis as a Bridge Between Data and In-
terpretation. In 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Tokyo,
Japan) (IUI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
503–507. https://doi.org/10.1145/3172944.3173007
[59] Priyanka More and Rashmi Phalnikar. 2012. Generating UML diagrams from
natural language specifications. International Journal of Applied Information
Systems 1, 8 (2012), 19–23.
[60] Raphael Moura, Michael Beer, Edoardo Patelli, and John Lewis. 2017. Learning
from major accidents: Graphical representation and analysis of multi-attribute
events to enhance risk communication. Safety science 99 (2017), 58–70.
[61] Lluís Màrquez, Xavier Carreras, Kenneth C. Litkowski, and Suzanne
Stevenson. 2008. Semantic Role Labeling: An Introduction to the
Special Issue. Computational Linguistics 34, 2 (06 2008), 145–159.
https://doi.org/10.1162/coli.2008.34.2.145 arXiv:https://direct.mit.edu/coli/article-
pdf/34/2/145/1798596/coli.2008.34.2.145.pdf
[62] Arpit Narechania, Arjun Srinivasan, and John Stasko. 2020. NL4DV: A toolkit for
generating analytic specifications for data visualization from natural language
queries. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 27, 2 (2020),
369–379.
[63] Donald A. Norman and Stephen W. Draper. 1986. User Centered System Design;
New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction . L. Erlbaum Associates Inc.,
USA.
[64] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL]
[65] Srishti Palani, Yingyi Zhou, Sheldon Zhu, and Steven P. Dow. 2022. InterWeave:
Presenting Search Suggestions in Context Scaffolds Information Search and
Synthesis. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology (Bend, OR, USA) (UIST ’22). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 93, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3526113.3545696
[66] M. Palmer, D. Gildea, and N. Xue. 2011. Semantic Role Labeling . Morgan &
Claypool Publishers. https://books.google.com/books?id=saBdAQAAQBAJ
[67] Hammond Pearce, Benjamin Tan, Baleegh Ahmad, Ramesh Karri, and Bren-
dan Dolan-Gavitt. 2022. Examining Zero-Shot Vulnerability Repair with Large
Language Models. arXiv:2112.02125 [cs.CR]
[68] Jakub Piskorski and Roman Yangarber. 2013. Information Extraction: Past, Present
and Future. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 23–49. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-28569-1_2
[69] Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Jiaao Chen, Michihiro Yasunaga,
and Diyi Yang. 2023. Is ChatGPT a General-Purpose Natural Language Processing
Task Solver? arXiv:2302.06476 [cs.CL]

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
[70] Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. 2021. Prompt Programming for Large Lan-
guage Models: Beyond the Few-Shot Paradigm. arXiv:2102.07350 [cs.CL]
[71] Michail Schwab, Hendrik Strobelt, James Tompkin, Colin Fredericks, Connor Huff,
Dana Higgins, Anton Strezhnev, Mayya Komisarchik, Gary King, and Hanspeter
Pfister. 2017. booc.io: An Education System with Hierarchical Concept Maps
and Dynamic Non-linear Learning Plans. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 23, 1 (2017), 571–580. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2016.
2598518
[72] Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. 2023. Reflexion: an autonomous
agent with dynamic memory and self-reflection. arXiv:2303.11366 [cs.AI]
[73] Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang,
Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, Devi Parikh, Sonal Gupta,
and Yaniv Taigman. 2022. Make-A-Video: Text-to-Video Generation without
Text-Video Data. arXiv:2209.14792 [cs.CV]
[74] Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan
Tremblay, Dieter Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. 2022. Prog-
Prompt: Generating Situated Robot Task Plans using Large Language Models.
arXiv:2209.11302 [cs.RO]
[75] Anselm Spoerri. 1993. InfoCrystal: A Visual Tool for Information Retrieval &
Management. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management (Washington, D.C., USA) (CIKM ’93). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 11–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/
170088.170095
[76] Chase Stokes and Marti Hearst. 2022. Why More Text is (Often) Bet-
ter: Themes from Reader Preferences for Integration of Charts and Text.
arXiv:2209.10789 [cs.HC]
[77] Chase Stokes, Vidya Setlur, Bridget Cogley, Arvind Satyanarayan, and Marti A.
Hearst. 2023. Striking a Balance: Reader Takeaways and Preferences when
Integrating Text and Charts. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 29, 1 (2023), 1233–1243. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2022.3209383
[78] Tamara Sumner, Faisal Ahmad, Sonal Bhushan, Qianyi Gu, Francis Molina, Sted-
man Willard, Michael Wright, Lynne Davis, and Greg Janée. 2005. Linking
learning goals and educational resources through interactive concept map visu-
alizations. International Journal on Digital Libraries 5 (2005), 18–24.
[79] Ivan E. Sutherland. 1964. Sketch Pad a Man-Machine Graphical Communication
System. In Proceedings of the SHARE Design Automation Workshop (DAC ’64) .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 6.329–6.346. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/800265.810742
[80] Chien-Lin Tang, Jingxian Liao, Hao-Chuan Wang, Ching-Ying Sung, and Wen-
Chieh Lin. 2021. ConceptGuide: Supporting Online Video Learning with Concept
Map-Based Recommendation of Learning Path. In Proceedings of the Web Confer-
ence 2021 (Ljubljana, Slovenia) (WWW ’21). Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 2757–2768. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442381.3449808
[81] Barbara Tversky, Julie Bauer Morrison, and Mireille Betrancourt. 2002. Animation:
can it facilitate? International journal of human-computer studies 57, 4 (2002),
247–262. https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.2002.1017
[82] Priyan Vaithilingam, Tianyi Zhang, and Elena L. Glassman. 2022. Expectation
vs. Experience: Evaluating the Usability of Code Generation Tools Powered by
Large Language Models. In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI EA ’22).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 332, 7 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519665
[83] Bret Victor. 2011. Up and Down the Ladder of Abstraction: A Systematic Approach
to Interactive Visualization. http://worrydream.com/LadderOfAbstraction/
[84] Johannes Wheeldon. 2011. Is a Picture Worth a Thousand Words? Using Mind
Maps to Facilitate Participant Recall in Qualitative Research. Qualitative Report
16, 2 (2011), 509–522.
[85] Terry Winograd et al. 1972. Shrdlu: A system for dialog.
[86] Po-Han Wu, Gwo-Jen Hwang, Marcelo Milrad, Hui-Ru Ke, and Yueh-Min Huang.
2012. An innovative concept map approach for improving students’ learning
performance with an instant feedback mechanism. British Journal of Educational
Technology 43, 2 (2012), 217–232.
[87] Tongshuang Wu, Ellen Jiang, Aaron Donsbach, Jeff Gray, Alejandra Molina,
Michael Terry, and Carrie J Cai. 2022. PromptChainer: Chaining Large Language
Model Prompts through Visual Programming. In Extended Abstracts of the 2022
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA)
(CHI EA ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article
359, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519729
[88] Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. 2022. AI Chains: Transparent
and Controllable Human-AI Interaction by Chaining Large Language Model
Prompts. InProceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA)(CHI ’22). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, Article 385, 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.
3517582
[89] Haijun Xia. 2020. Crosspower: Bridging Graphics and Linguistics. In Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology
(Virtual Event, USA) (UIST ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 722–734. https://doi.org/10.1145/3379337.3415845
[90] Haijun Xia, Ken Hinckley, Michel Pahud, Xiao Tu, and Bill Buxton. 2017. Writ-
Large: Ink Unleashed by Unified Scope, Action, & Zoom. InProceedings of the 2017
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA)
(CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3227–3240.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025664
[91] Haijun Xia, Jennifer Jacobs, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2020. Crosscast: Adding
Visuals to Audio Travel Podcasts. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Sym-
posium on User Interface Software and Technology (Virtual Event, USA) (UIST
’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 735–746.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3379337.3415882
[92] Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, and Daphne Ippolito. 2022. Wordcraft: Story
Writing With Large Language Models. In 27th International Conference on Intelli-
gent User Interfaces (Helsinki, Finland) (IUI ’22). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 841–852. https://doi.org/10.1145/3490099.3511105
[93] Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A. Smith. 2023.
How Language Model Hallucinations Can Snowball. arXiv:2305.13534 [cs.CL]
[94] Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. 2022. Learning
to prompt for vision-language models. International Journal of Computer Vision
130, 9 (2022), 2337–2348.
A PROMPTS
We provide all the prompts that we use for the prototype environ-
ment of Graphologue with OpenAI GPT-4 API. System, User, and
Assistant (i.e. GPT-4) are pre-defined roles for querying the API3.
A.1 Initial Query
System Please provide a well-structured response to the user’s
question in multiple paragraphs. The paragraphs should cover the
most important aspects of the answer, with each of them discussing
one aspect or topic. Each paragraph should have fewer than 4
sentences, and your response should have fewer than 4 paragraphs
in total. The user’s goal is to construct a concept map to visually
explain your response. To achieve this, annotate the key entities
and relationships inline for each sentence in the paragraphs.
Entities are usually noun phrases and should be annotated with
[entity ($N1)], for example, [Artificial Intelligence ($N1)]. Do not
annotate conjunctive adverbs, such as “since then” or “therefore”,
as entities in the map.
A relationship is usually a word or a phrase that consists of verbs,
adjectives, adverbs, or prepositions, e.g., “contribute to”, “by”, “is”,
and “such as”. Relationships should be annotated with the relevant
entities and saliency of the relationship, as high ($H) or low ($L),
in the format of [relationship ($H, $N1, $N2)], for example, [AI
systems ($N1)] can be [divided into ($H, $N1, $N9; $H, $N1, $N10)]
[narrow AI ($N9)] and [general AI ($N10)]. Relationships of high
saliency are those included in summaries. Relationships of low
saliency are often omitted in summaries. It’s important to choose
relationships that accurately reflect the nature of the connection
between the entities in text, and to use a consistent annotation
format throughout the paragraphs.
You should try to annotate at least one relationship for each
entity. Relationships should only connect entities that appear in the
response. You can arrange the sentences in a way that facilitates
the annotation of entities and relationships, but the arrangement
should not alter their meaning, and they should still flow naturally
in language.
Example paragraph A: [Artificial Intelligence (AI) ($N1)] [is a
($H, $N1, $N2)] [field of computer science ($N2)] that [creates ($H,
$N1, $N3)] [intelligent machines ($N3)]. [These machines ($N3)]
[possess ($H, $N3, $N4)] [capabilities ($N4)] [such as ($L, $N4,
3https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/chat

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
$N5; $L, $N4, $N6; $L, $N4, $N7; $L, $N4, $N8)] [learning ($N5)],
[reasoning ($N6)], [perception ($N7)], and [problem-solving ($N8)].
[AI systems ($N1)] can be [divided into ($H, $N1, $N9; $H, $N1,
$N10)] [narrow AI ($N9)] and [general AI ($N10)]. [Narrow AI
($N9)] [is designed for ($L, $N9, $N11)] [specific tasks ($N11)],
while [general AI ($N10)] [aims to ($L, $N10, $N12)] [mimic human
intelligence ($N12)]. [It ($N1)] [has grown across ($H, $N1, $N13)]
[multiple industries ($N13)], [leading to ($L, $N1, $N14; $L, $N1,
$N15; $L, $N1, $N16)] [improved efficiency ($N14)], [enhanced
decision-making ($N15)], and [better user experiences ($N16)].
Example paragraph B: [Human-Computer Interaction ($N1)]
[is a ($H, $N1, $N2)] [multidisciplinary field ($N2)] that [focuses
on ($H, $N1, $N3)] [the design and use of computer technology
($N3)], [centered around ($H, $N1, $N4)] [the interfaces ($N4)]
[between ($H, $N4, $N5; $H, $N4, $N6)] [people (users) ($N5)]
and [computers ($N6)]. [Researchers ($N7)] [working on $($L, $N1,
$N7)] [HCI ($N1)] [study ($H, $N7, $N8)] [issues ($N8)] [related
to ($L, $N8, $N9; $L, $N8, $N10; $L, $N8, $N11)] [usability ($N9)],
[accessibility ($N10)], and [user experience ($N11)] [in ($L, $N9,
$N3; $L, $N10, $N3; $L, $N11, $N3)] [technology design ($N3)].
Example paragraph C: [Birds ($N1)] [can ($H, $N1, $N2)] [fly
($N2)] [due to ($H, $N2, $N3)] [a combination of physiological
adaptations ($N3)]. [One key ($H, $N3, $N4)] [adaptation ($N4)]
[is ($H, $N4, $N5)] the [presence of lightweight bones ($N5)] that
[reduce ($H, $N5, $N6)] [their body weight ($N6)], [making ($L,
$N5, $N7)] it [easier for them to fly ($N7)]. [Another ($H, $N3, $N8)]
[adaptation ($N8)] [is ($H, $N8, $N9)] the [structure of their wings
($N9)] which [are designed for ($H, $N9, $N2)] [flight ($N2)].
Your response should have multiple paragraphs.
User [The query provided by the user.]
A.2 Self-Correction
[The initial prompts and responses from the System, User, and As-
sistant.]
System In the following sentence of your original response, there
are some issues that need to be fixed.
The entities [list the annotated entities, separate by commas] were
mentioned but not connected by any relationships. [Add this para-
graph only if orphan nodes were detected.]
One or more relationships annotated by relationship annotations
[list the annotated relationships, separate by commas] were trying
to connect entities with ids that are not mentioned in the response.
[Add this paragraph only if dead-end relationships were detected.]
In your corrected response, please make sure that all entities and
relationships are extracted correctly. Relationships should only con-
nect existing entities, and entities should be connected by at least
one relationship. Please try to fix these issues in your response by
annotating the same sentence again. You may arrange the sentences
in a way that facilitates the annotation of entities and relationships,
but the arrangement should not alter their meaning and they should
still flow naturally in language.
When annotating a new entity that was not mentioned in the
previous response, please make sure that they are annotated with a
new entity id (for example, if the previous annotation has reached
id “$N102”, then the new annotation id should start at “$N103”).
However, if the same entity has appeared in the original response,
please match their id.
Please only include the re-annotated sentence in your response.
A.3 Summary
System You are a professional writer specializing in text summa-
rization. Make a short, one-sentence summary of the chunk of the
text provided by the user. The summary should reflect the main idea
and the most important relationships of the text. Notice that the
user has annotated the text with entities and relationships. Each
entity is annotated with a unique id in the format of [Artificial
Intelligence ($N1)]. Each relationship is annotated in the format of
[has the ability to ($L, $N1, $N10; $H, $N1, $N11)], where $L or $H
is the saliency of the relationship, and $N1, $N10, and $N11 are the
ids of the entities that the relationship connects. One annotated
relationship may connect multiple pairs of entities, and they are
separated by semicolons in the annotation. When summarizing the
text, annotate the summarization with a consistent style for the
entities and relationships. Please only use the entity ids that are
mentioned in the original text, and match the ids in the original
text and summarization if they are the same entity. Your summary
should only include high saliency relationships ($H) to reflect the
most important ideas in the paragraph. You can arrange the sen-
tences in the summarization in a way that facilitates the annotation
of entities and relationships, but the arrangement should not al-
ter their meaning and they should still flow naturally in language.
The user may make mistakes in the annotation that there might
be some entities that are not connected by any relationships, or
some relationships that are trying to connect entities that are not
mentioned in the text. Please avoid these mistakes when annotating
the summary. Your summary should have only one short sentence.
Do not include anything else in the response other than the
annotated, summarized text. For example, for paragraph: [Human-
Computer Interaction ($N1)] [is a ($H, $N1, $N2)] [multidisciplinary
field ($N2)] that [focuses on ($H, $N1, $N3)] [the design and use of
computer technology ($N3)], [centered around ($H, $N1, $N4)] [the
interfaces ($N4)] [between ($H, $N4, $N5; $H, $N4, $N6)] [people
(users) ($N5)] and [computers ($N6)]. [Researchers ($N7)] [working
on $($L, $N1, $N7)] [HCI ($N1)] [study ($H, $N7, $N8)] [issues
($N8)] [related to ($L, $N8, $N9; $L, $N8, $N10; $L, $N8, $N11)] [us-
ability ($N9)], [accessibility ($N10)], and [user experience ($N11)]
[in ($L, $N9, $N3; $L, $N10, $N3; $L, $N11, $N3)] [technology design
($N3)].
You may summarize it as: [HCI ($N1)] [is a ($H, $N1, $N2)]
[multidisciplinary field ($N2)] that [centered around ($H, $N1, $N4)]
[the interfaces ($N4)] [between ($H, $N4, $N5; $H, $N4, $N6)] [users
($N5)] and [computers ($N6)].
User [The paragraph to be summarized, from the original response.]
A.4 Outline
System You are a professional presentation slide builder. Structure
the following text provided by the user into a presentation slide, in
markdown format. If you need to use a list, use a numbered list. Do
not include anything else in the response other than the markdown
text.
User [The paragraph to create the outline, from the original response.]

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Graphologue: Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
A.5 Node Explanation
[The initial prompts and responses from the System, User, and As-
sistant.]
User In the sentence [the sentence containing the node from the
original response], you mentioned the entity [node label]. Can you
explain this entity in 1 to 2 sentences? Please refer to the origi-
nal response as the context of your explanation. Your explanation
should be concise, one paragraph, and follow the same annotation
format as the original response. You should try to annotate at least
one relationship for each entity. Relationships should only connect
entities that appear in the response. When annotating a new entity
that was not mentioned in the previous response, please make sure
that they are annotated with a new entity id (for example, if the
previous annotation has reached id “$N102”, then the new anno-
tation id should start at “$N103”). However, if the same entity has
appeared in the original response, please match their id.
For example, for “[general AI ($N10)]” in the sentence “[AI sys-
tems ($N1)] can be [divided into ($H, $N1, $N9; $H, $N1, $N10)]
[narrow AI ($N9)] and [general AI ($N10)]. ”: [General AI ($N10)]
refers to a [type of ($L, $N1, $N10)] [artificial intelligence ($N1)]
that [has the ability to ($L, $N10, $N14; $L, $N10, $N5; $L, $N10,
$N15)] [understand ($N14)], [learn ($N5)], and [apply knowledge
across a wide range of tasks ($N15)].
A.6 Node Examples
[The initial prompts and responses from the System, User, and As-
sistant.]
User In the sentence [the sentence containing the node from the
original response], you mentioned the entity [node label]. Can you
give a few examples of it? Your response should follow the same an-
notation format as the original response, as shown in the following
example. When annotating a new entity that was not mentioned in
the previous response, please make sure that they are annotated
with a new entity id (for example, if the previous annotation has
reached id “$N102”, then the new annotation id should start at
“$N103”). However, if the same entity has appeared in the original
response, please match their id. You don’t need to further explain
the examples you give.
For example, for “[Fruits ($N1)]” in the sentence “[Fruits ($N1)]
can [help with ($H, $N1, $N2)] [health ($N2)]. ”, your response
could be: “[Fruits ($N1)], for example, [includes ($H, $N1, $N3;
$H, $N1, $N4; $H, $N1, $N5)], [apples ($N3)], [oranges ($N4)], and
[watermelons ($N5)]. ”
A.7 Tell Me More
[The initial prompts and responses from the System, User, and As-
sistant.]
User For the paragraph [the paragraph to be extended] , can you
continue writing one or two more sentences at the end of the
paragraph? When continue writing this paragraph, please refer to
the original response as the context of your writing. Your response
should be about the same topic and aspect of the original paragraph
and could add more details. Your response should follow the same
annotation format as the original response. When annotating a
new entity that was not mentioned in the previous response, please
make sure that they are annotated with a new entity id (for example,
if the previous annotation has reached id “$N102”, then the new
annotation id should start at “$N103”). However, if the same entity
has appeared in the original response, please match their id. Your
response should only have the new content.
A.8 Add a Paragraph
[The initial prompts and responses from the System, User, and As-
sistant.]
User Can you continue writing one paragraph after the end of your
original response? When writing the new paragraph, please refer to
the original response as the context of your writing. Your response
should still try to answer the user’s original question and could
add more details or provide a new aspect. Your response should
follow the same annotation format as the original response. When
annotating a new entity that was not mentioned in the previous re-
sponse, please make sure that they are annotated with a new entity
id (for example, if the previous annotation has reached id “$N102”,
then the new annotation id should start at “$N103”). However, if
the same entity has appeared in the original response, please match
their id. Your response should only have the new content.

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
UIST ’23, October 29-November 1, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Jiang et al.
B TECHNICAL EV ALUATION EXPLANATION AND EXAMPLES
Table 2: Annotation Error Explanation and Examples
Category Error Content
Node
Annotation
Error Types
Missing Entity Phrase An entity that is not annotated when should.
Example ... [is driven by ($H, $N8, $N9)] the [need to reduce ($H, $N7, $N10)] [greenhouse gas
emissions ($N10)] from traditional internal combustion engines .
Incomplete Entity Entity annotations lacking necessary label words or splitting a single entity phrase.
Example [Impressionist painters ($N1)] [belong to ($H, $N1, $N2)] [the Impressionism ($N2)]
[art movement ($N3)].
Incorrect Entity An entity annotation that includes words or phrases that do not belong to the entity.
Example [However ($N13)], [the Industrial Revolution ($N13)] [led to ($H, $N13, $N14)] [mass
production ($N14)] of [clothing ($N3)].
Incorrect Co-reference Labeling co-referenced entities with different identifiers.
Example [Apple ($N1)] [is ($H, $N1, $N2)] [good ($N2)]. [It ($N3)] [helps ($H, $N3, $N4)]
[health ($N4)]. (Count as 1 incorrect.)
Relationship
Annotation
Error Types
Missing Relationship A relationship that is not annotated when should.
Example ... [establishing ($H, $N1, $N5)] [political systems ($N5)], [economies ($N6)], and
[cultural practices ($N7)]. (Missing relationships for economies and cultural practices.)
Incomplete Relationship A relationship annotation that does not include the whole phrase as the label.
Example [should be ($H, $N12, $N13)] [based on ($H, $N13, $N14)]
Dead-end Relationship A relationship annotation that includes entity identifiers that do not exist.
Example [These philosophers ($N9)] [emphasized ($H, $N9, $N13)] [the importance of ($L,
$N13, $N14; $L, $N13, $N15)] [subjectivity ($N14)] and [individual freedom ($N15)].
Reversed Relationship A relationship that has been annotated with reversed direction.
Example [Apple ($N1)] [is ($H, $N2, $N1)] [good ($N2)].
Misattributed Relationship A relationship that is annotated with the wrong pair of entities.
Example [Gods ($N4)] in [Greek mythology ($N1)] [play ($H, $N1, $N4)] [central roles ($N10)]
in [the narratives ($N11)]. (Should be $N4, $N10.)
Detectable
Error Types
Orphan Node Nodes that are not involved in any relationships, might be caused by Incorrect Entity
or Incomplete Relationship. (Percentage divided by Total Extracted Entity Phrase.)
Dead-end Relationship Links that try to connect non-existent nodes, caused by Dead-end Relationship. (Per-
centage divided by Total Extracted Relationship.)