=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-024-12881-y
How educational chatbots support self-regulated learning?
A systematic review of the literature
Rui Guan 1 · Mladen Rakovi´c1 · Guanliang Chen 1 · Dragan Gaševi´c1,2
Received: 18 March 2024 / Accepted: 21 June 2024 / Published online: 30 August 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Engagement in self-regulated learning (SRL) may improve academic achievements
and support development of lifelong learning skills. Despite its educational potential,
many students ﬁnd SRL challenging. Educational chatbots have a potential to scaffold
or externally regulate SRL processes by interacting with students in an adaptive way.
However, to our knowledge, researchers have yet to learn whether and how educational
chatbots developed so far have (1) promoted learning processes pertaining to SRL and
(2) improved student learning performance in different tasks. To contribute this new
knowledge to the ﬁeld, we conducted a systematic literature review of the studies on
educational chatbots that can be linked to processes of SRL. In doing so, we followed
the PRISMA guidelines. We collected and reviewed publications published between
2012 and 2023, and identiﬁed 27 publications for analysis. We found that educational
chatbots so far have mainly supported learners to identify learning resources, enact
appropriate learning strategies, and metacognitively monitor their studying. Limited
guidance has been provided to students to set learning goals, create learning plans,
reﬂect on their prior studying, and adapt to their future studying. Most of the chatbots
in the reviewed corpus of studies appeared to promote productive SRL processes
and boost learning performance of students across different domains, conﬁrming the
potential of this technology to support SRL. However, in some studies the chatbot
interventions showed non-signiﬁcant and mixed effects. In this paper, we also discuss
the ﬁndings and provide recommendations for future research.
Keywords Educational chatbot · Self-regulated learning · Scaffolding ·
Artiﬁcial intelligence
1 Introduction
Self-regulated learning (SRL) is considered a complex set of recursive and goal-
oriented learning processes (Panadero,2017). Self-regulated learners set their learning
goals and actively select, monitor and modify their learning strategies to accomplish
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
123

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
4494 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
these goals and succeed in different learning tasks (Zimmerman, 2013; Winne &
Hadwin, 1998; Winne, 2022; Cleary et al., 2022). Self-regulated learners are thus in
control over their learning processes and learning goals (Winne,2018). As engagement
in SRL processes has a potential to improve academic achievements and, more broadly,
to support lifelong learning (Cleary & Chen,2009; Klug et al.,2011; Recommendation,
2018; Theobald, 2021), it is critical for students to master their command of SRL and
become productive learners in different domains of knowledge.
To advance understanding of SRL and identify the relationships among differ-
ent learning processes involved, researchers have proposed several SRL theoretical
frameworks, such as Winne and Hadwin ( 1998); Winne (2018); Zimmerman ( 2000);
Pintrich (2000). Although differences among these theoretical models are noticeable,
these models broadly agree that SRL is a cyclic process that involves a repertoire
of learning goals and learning strategies (Panadero, 2017). For example, according
to Zimmerman ( 2000), self-regulated learners selectively use speciﬁc processes to
work on learning tasks, over three cyclical phases: forethought, performance and self-
refection. Winne and Hadwin (1998)’s theoretical model describes SRL as a dynamic
set of skills where learning unfolds over ﬁve facets (conditions, operations, products,
evaluations, and standards - COPES) and four phases (deﬁning task requirements,
setting goals and devising plans, enacting study tactics, and adapting future studying).
Even though researchers have made a substantial progress over the past several
decades towards deeper understanding and more effective support for learning pro-
cesses involved in SRL, development of SRL skills is still considered challenging for
many students (Bjork et al., 2013). For example, students struggle to gather appropri-
ate resources for a learning task (List & Du, 2021); set relevant, speciﬁc and attainable
goals to guide their engagement with the task(McCardle et al., 2017); select appropri-
ate learning strategies and effectively use them (Azevedo, 2018;L i s t&L i n ,2023);
and accurately monitor and evaluate their own progress (Zimmerman, 2002; Gutier-
rez de Blume, 2022; Lim et al., 2023). Students often need guidance to successfully
enact these learning processes. Educational researchers and practitioners proposed
different types of external support to students as they are developing SRL skills (Jivet
et al., 2020, 2021; Perez-Alvarez et al., 2022). Broadly, the SRL support has so far
been provided in a more traditional way, e.g., via a classroom-style coaching on goal
setting (McCardle et al., 2017; Morisano et al., 2010; Alessandri et al., 2020) and
metacognitive strategies (Cleary et al., 2022; Dignath & V eenman, 2021), and, more
recently, using technology-enhanced learning platforms, e.g., computer-based scaf-
folding environments that support task orientation, strategy use and metacognitive
monitoring (Baker et al., 2020; Azevedo et al., 2017; Azevedo & Aleven, 2013; Pérez
et al.,
2020; Jivet et al., 2020, 2021; Dever et al., 2023; Srivastava et al., 2022;L i me t
al., 2023).
In recent years, researchers have become increasingly interested in using chatbots
to address educational problems (Wollny et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023).
One of the main reasons for such increased interest is that chatbots have a potential
to scaffold or externally regulate learning processes in dynamically changing learning
contexts like SRL (Azevedo & Hadwin, 2005), because chatbots use artiﬁcial intel-
ligence and natural language processing to simulate and adapt to conversation with
humans. Following the growing interest in educational chatbots, researchers have
123

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4495
recently published several literature reviews on the topic (Winkler & Söllner, 2018;
Pérez et al., 2020; Smutny & Schreiberova, 2020). All these reviews have contributed
a signiﬁcant knowledge to this ﬁeld, providing valuable ﬁndings about the currently
available educational chatbots across disciplines and the beneﬁts of using chatbot tech-
nologies in education to, e.g., supplement teaching or recommend learning content to
students. However, to our knowledge, researchers have yet to learn how educational
chatbots developed so far have supported processes theorised in SRL. These new
ﬁndings may add to the current educational research and practice given the docu-
mented beneﬁts of SRL skills for academic performance and life-long learning. To
contribute new research knowledge to the ﬁelds of educational technology and learn-
ing sciences, we conducted the present systematic review of the literature explicitly
focusing on how educational chatbots have been used to support SRL processes and
learning achievements. Our analysis was based on Winne and Hadwin ( 1998)’s the-
oretical framework that deﬁned facets and phases of SRL. Our ﬁndings may inform
future research related to development and implementation of educational chatbots
that provide a more comprehensive SRL support to learners.
2 Background
2.1 SRL theoretical framework to guide this systematic review
Different theoretical frameworks have been proposed to date to deﬁne SRL processes
and to understand the relationships among them, and, in this way, help researchers to
measure and support learners’ engagement in SRL. For an overview of major SRL
theoretical frameworks, see Panadero ( 2017). To theoretically ground our systematic
literature review, we utilized the SRL theoretical model proposed by Winne and Had-
win (1998). According to this framework, students’ SRL processes unfold over four
general phases: task deﬁnition, goal setting and planning, enacting study tactics, and
adaptation to future studying, and ﬁve facets: conditions, operations, products, eval-
uations and standards. We opted to use this framework because (1) it is one of the
six most cited frameworks in the literature, signifying its robustness and widespread
acceptance among researchers, and it is particularly welcomed in research involving
computer assisted learning (Panadero et al., 2016); (2) it provides a comprehensive
account of cognitive, metacognitive and motivational processes that interweave in SRL
offering a holistic view of the learning process; and (3) the model is distinguished by
its detailed depiction of how different phases interact with each other over time as
learning unfolds, affording researchers and educators ways to design speciﬁc and
time-sensitive SRL support to learners (Greene & Azevedo, 2007).
The ﬁrst phase in Winne and Hadwin’s model of SRL is task deﬁnition where learn-
ers make inferences and develop perceptions about the features of the task, and survey
available resources for studying. The next phase is goal setting and planning where
learners set their learning goals, devise plans and determine learning strategies which
will be used to accomplish goals for learning. In the following phase, students enact
their learning strategies and oversee (i.e., metacognitively monitor) the effectiveness
of those strategies in addressing the task. For example, learners might highlight key
123

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
4496 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
concepts and construct a vocabulary list during a reading task, and, if they deem this
strategy to be ineffective, they may decide to modify (i.e., metacognitively control) it,
e.g., engage in note-taking instead of highlighting. In the adaptation phase, learners
reﬂect on their studying during the previous stages and make forward-reaching adap-
tations for similar tasks in the future, e.g., a learner may decide to include note-taking
in a repository of preferable learning strategies for the upcoming reading comprehen-
sion tasks, as note-taking worked well for the learner in the present task. In this way,
learners reach beyond the present task and change their cognitive conditions for future
learning (Greene & Azevedo, 2007).
Learning activities that unfold over the four general phases of SRL can be char-
acterised relative to ﬁve common dimensions, i.e., facets: conditions, operations,
products, evaluations and standards (COPES). Conditions encompass different inter-
nal and external factors that affect how a learner will engage with a task. For example,
internal conditions include the learner’s prior knowledge of a domain, knowledge
of learning strategies, experience with a task, and motivation and interest in a task;
whereas external conditions include available learning resources, task instructions,
scoring rubrics and time constraints. Operations are the processes by which learners
manipulate information at hand and, in that way, induce actual learning (Winne,2022).
Winne (2018) deﬁned ﬁve fundamental operations including searching, monitoring,
assembling, rehearsing and translating (SMART). As learners engage in operations,
they create products of learning, e.g., a note, essay draft or program code. Self-
regulated learners actively evaluate their learning products against standards, e.g.,
a scoring rubric or instructional objectives. Upon evaluating their learning products,
self-regulated learners may engage in metacognitive control, i.e., they may decide to
modify their learning goals and strategies, and revise the products (Greene & Azevedo,
2007;R a k o v i ´c et al., 2022a).
2.2 Educational chatbots
A chatbot is an interactive computer program enhanced by artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
and natural language processing (NLP) to simulate conversation with humans through
text and voice. Since the development of the earliest chatbot Eliza (Weizenbaum,
1966) in 1966, various chatbots have evolved providing interactive interface for users
to engage with different services, resources, and data in a natural conversational style
(McTear, 2020). As well, chatbots have been used as tools to understand and model
human behavior (McTear, 2020). The use of chatbots has seen a signiﬁcant increase
over the past several years (Zawacki-Richter et al., 2019), offering support to users
in different contexts, e.g., customer services, online shopping and banking (Illescas-
Manzano et al., 2021).
Due to its characteristics to dynamically and adaptively interact with users, educa-
tional chatbots have been considered a viable option to support learning in different
settings (Smutny & Schreiberova, 2020), including SRL. For example, as metacogni-
tive processes of monitoring and control are considered central in SRL (Winne,2022),
learners need to continuously engage those processes to succeed in a learning task.
Many learners, however, struggle to sustain these metacognitive processes throughout
123

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4497
a learning session (Azevedo & Aleven, 2013), which further prevents them from pro-
ductively engaging in SRL and performing well in a task. Educational chatbot may
provide external regulation to learners by performing a part of metacognitive monitor-
ing instead of students having to conduct these processes by themselves (Molenaar,
2022), e.g, a bot may identify two learning strategies that a learner had used previ-
ously in the task and ask a learner to compare the effectiveness of these two strategies
relative to task requirements. In this way, a chatbot may help the learner preserve cog-
nitive resources for other aspects of the task, e.g., constructing deeper understanding
of concepts studied. As well, by providing SRL guidance to students, chatbot may
help learners increase their engagement across phases and facets of SRL, which may
further beneﬁt their development of SRL skills and boost their academic achievements.
Recent literature reviews (Winkler & Söllner, 2018; Pérez et al., 2020;S m u t n y&
Schreiberova, 2020; Wollny et al., 2021) have reported that chatbots have been used
for the two main purposes in educational settings, including (1) service support and (2)
teaching support. Building on the success of chatbots in the area of customer service,
chatbots have been used at many educational institutions to provide service support to
students, e.g., support with enrolment, library and campus resources (Sweidan et al.,
2021; Allison, 2012). For example, an interactive bot SIAAA-C (Sweidan et al.,2021)
is designed to provide students with important campus resources, e.g., campus map
and notiﬁcations during COVID-19. On the other hand, teaching-oriented chatbots
have been commonly used in formal education to supplement traditional teaching in
different domains, e.g., languages, math and science. Harnessing their conversational
features, those chatbots typically play the role of human tutor and provide learners with
content knowledge and practice questions. For instance, Wu et al. ( 2020) developed a
multi-module chatbot that supported students studying mathematics and Chinese his-
tory, whereas Mageira et al. (2022) and V ázquez-Cano et al. (2021) created the chatbots
to help students learn English and Spanish, respectively, e.g., through prompting and
recommending additional learning resources. The literature reviews published so far
(Winkler & Söllner, 2018; Pérez et al., 2020; Smutny & Schreiberova, 2020; Wollny
et al., 2021) identifed different types of educational chatbots and technologies used to
implement those bots. These reviews have also revealed the potential of using chatbots
to facilitate teaching and learning processes, to recommend learning content and to
provide service support to students. While there have been several studies investigating
the use of chatbots for SRL, there has been insufﬁcient understanding about the extent
to which different aspects of SRL have been supported by chatbots. To address this
gap, we conducted a systematic literature review to learn (1) how educational chatbots
have provided support for learners’ SRL and (2) how that support has affected learn-
ers’ SRL skills and performance. This inquiry is critical because by identifying and
synthesizing the ways in which educational chatbots contribute to or hinder SRL, our
study could potentially offer valuable insights into the design of more effective edu-
cational technologies that are aligned with pedagogical goals. Second, understanding
the impact of chatbots on learners’ SRL skills and performance can inform educa-
tors and policymakers about the potential beneﬁts and limitations of integrating these
technologies into the learning environments. More formally, the following Research
Questions guided our systematic review:
123

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
4498 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
• RQ1: How have educational chatbots been used to support students’ SRL processes
relative to (i) phases and (ii) facets theorised in Winne and Hadwin ( 1998) and
Winne (2018)?
• RQ2: To what extent has the use of educational chatbots improved learners’ SRL
processing and learning performance?
3 Methodology
We conducted a systematic review of the literature to answer our research questions.
To ensure a thorough and transparent systematic literature review process, we carried
this review using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-
Analysis (PRISMA) framework as a guideline (Page et al., 2021; Moher et al., 2009).
The systematic literature review involved three major phases (1) search for relevant
publications in multiple bibliographical databases, (2) select relevant publications
following the PRISMA framework, (3) extract and analyse relevant information in
selected publications to answer research questions.
3.1 Literature search
We utilized the SPIDER framework (Cooke et al., 2012) to deﬁne parameters for the
literature search. The SPIDER framework proposes ﬁve general groups of search cri-
teria, including sample, phenomenon of interest, design, evaluation and research type.
As per our inclusion criteria (detailed in the next section) our Sample (S) involved stu-
dents studying in formal educational settings at primary, secondary and tertiary levels.
The Phenomena of our Interest (PI) were self-regulated learning and educational chat-
bots. We searched for research studies that have been Designed to empirically evaluate
the effects of chatbots on SRL (D) and that have reported outcome measures based
on these Evaluations (E). We included qualitative, quantitative and mixed-methods
studies (R) in our search.
We used the following search query: (“chatbot” OR “educational chatbot” OR “con-
versational agent”) AND “self-regulated learning” AND “formal education” AND
(“student” OR “learner”) AND “research article” to search for titles, abstracts and
keywords of publications in bibliographical databases. We included studies published
between 2012 and 2023, inclusively, as we deemed this time range to be sufﬁcient to
capture the state-of-the-art in the emerging ﬁeld of educational chatbots. We searched
the following bibliographical databases: Scopus, Elsevier, ACM, IEEE Xplore, Web
of Science, ERIC, PsychInfo, Wiley library, Google Scholar, ResearchGate and the
library database at our university. The search was conducted in October 2023. At this
stage, we retrieved 598 publications. After removing 72 duplicates, 526 publications
remained in our dataset for further analysis.
3.2 Abstract screening and full paper review
To identify relevant publications for our review we performed two reviewing steps,
following the PRISMA guidelines (1) abstract screening and (2) full paper review.
123

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4499
In other words, publications selected in the abstract screening step were reviewed in
full for their relevance at the full paper review step. For these two reviewing steps,
we followed our inclusion and exclusion criteria. Speciﬁcally, we included research
studies that:
1. Reported on the use of chatbots in formal educational settings
2. Reported on the use of chatbots to support students to engage in SRL processing
(e.g., goal setting, strategy use, and monitoring)
3. Described characteristics of educational chatbots (e.g., chatbot architecture and
types of utterances exchanged between student and bot)
4. Reported on the effectiveness of educational chatbots in supporting SRL skills
and/or learning outcomes
5. Were published in peer-reviewed journals and conference proceedings in English
between Jan 2012 and Oct 2023
We excluded:
1. Publications that reported on using chatbots outside of formal educational settings
(e.g., school administration and customer service)
2. Publications from which it could not be clearly inferred what SRL processes have
been supported by the chatbot (e.g., studies applying a third-party chatbot as a
black box intervention or using a chatbot to conduct a quiz)
3. Publications that did not provide a clear description of chatbot characteristics
4. Publications that did not provide the evaluation of chatbot effectiveness
5. Technical reports, conceptual and design papers
6. Non-peer reviewed publications and publications without available full-text
At the screening step, two reviewers screened the titles and abstracts of 526 publi-
cations, i.e., those publications that remained from the previous phase in this review.
Each reviewer had an opportunity to vote “Y es”, “Maybe” or “No” for the study, rel-
ative to whether the study should be included in the next stage of the review. The
reviewers had the agreement on 456 papers ( 86.7%, Fleiss kappa = 0.734, p<0.001).
The remaining 70 conﬂicts were resolved through discussion between the reviewers.
The main reasons for conﬂicts came from abstracts that did not explicitly state whether
the chatbot evaluation was performed in the study. The reviewers agreed to keep such
articles in the dataset and fully assess those in the next stage. A total of 101 publications
remained in the dataset after this stage.
At the full paper review step, the reviewers randomly selected 15 out of 101 publi-
cations (nearly 15%), separately reviewed those and voted whether the paper should
be included in the study or not, following the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The
reviewers agreed on 12 out of 15 publications (80%, Fleiss kappa = 0.52, p=0.04).
The common disagreement between the reviewers at this stage was about whether
the study provided a sufﬁciently clear description of the bot characteristics. This dis-
agreement was resolved through discussion between the reviewers and the decision
was made to include in the ﬁnal review only those publications that described types
of utterances exchanged between a student and a bot. The reviewers evenly split the
remaining publications in the dataset (i.e., 86 publications were randomly assigned to
each reviewer) and reviewed those separately. A total of 27 papers were extracted for
the review. We summarized our review process in Fig. 1 (Page et al., 2021).
123

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
4500 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
Fig. 1 PRISMA ﬂow diagram
3.3 Analysis of extracted publications
The ﬁrst author of this review extracted data from each publication as per following
categories: general information (publication title, authors, year, sample size, level of
education, domain of education and learning task), chatbot type, SRL facet (conditions,
operations, products, evaluations, and standards), SRL phase (task understanding,
goal setting and planning, enactment, and adaptation), and reported effects (on SRL
processes and learning achievements). To categorise publications into suitable SRL
facets and phases, the ﬁrst author closely followed deﬁnitions of constructs provided
in Winne and Hadwin ( 1998). See the section SRL Theoretical Framework to Guide
This Review for details. The analysis of SRL facets and phases in selected publications
123

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4501
was used to address RQ1, while the analysis of the reported effects of chatbots on SRL
processes and learning achievements was used to address RQ2.
4 Results
4.1 General information
We summarised the studies included in our systematic literature review in Fig. 2.O u t
of the 526 studies that we assessed in this review, 27 studies ﬁt the inclusion criteria
for full review. Over 92% of these studies were published in 2020 onward, i.e, six in
2020, 11 in 2021, two studies in 2022 and six studies in 2023, whereas only two studies
were published before 2020. We observed that 13 studies utilized a natural language
processing (NLP)-driven approach in their chatbot design to interpret and respond
to user inputs in a conversational manner. On the other hand, 13 studies employed
rule-based architectures in their chatbot design, i.e., following predeﬁned pathways
or rules to respond to speciﬁc commands or keywords, offering predictable and con-
sistent interactions within a structured framework (Fig. 2). Additional architectures in
the reviewed studies include an NLP-driven architecture with contextual bandit algo-
rithm (Cai et al., 2021) and knowledge-based system accessing a vast domain-speciﬁc
database to deliver accurate information (Chang et al., 2022b).
Further, the chatbots we reviewed provided SRL support to students in different
domains of education, including language learning, math, science, computer program-
Fig. 2 Number of publications by year color-coded with chatbot architectures
123

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
4502 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
Fig. 3 Domain of education supported by chatbot color-coded with participants’ level of education
ming, accounting and educational psychology, with language learning being slightly
more prominent than the other domains (Fig. 3). Moreover, the chatbots included in
this review have been mainly utilised in higher education, i.e., researchers provided
chatbots to university students in 21 studies. Two studies were conducted in primary
schools, three studies were conducted in secondary school and one study involved a
diverse student population recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk (Fig. 3).
4.2 RQ1: How have educational chatbots been used to support students’ SRL
processes relative to (1) phases and (2) facets theorised in Winne and Hadwin
(1998) and Winne (2018)?
Of 27 articles included in this review, 15 reported on using chatbots to support student
SRL processing in a single SRL phase, 11 articles reported on support across two and
1 article reported on support across three SRL phases. None of the reviewed studies
appeared to utilise educational chatbots to provide comprehensive SRL support across
all four phases of SRL deﬁned in Winne and Hadwin ( 1998). More speciﬁcally, in
25 articles researchers used chatbots to facilitate SRL during the strategy enactment
phase, i.e., the phase in which students are to select and use learning tactics and
strategies. In these studies, chatbots were mainly utilised to guide students to enact
learning tactics/strategies to accomplish a particular learning task, such as writing a
thesis statement (Lin & Chang, 2020) or an essay (Neumann et al., 2021), learning a
programming language (Ait et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2021) and developing a project
report (Kumar, 2021). Six chatbots supported students at the task deﬁnition stage, e.g.,
“Make sure to re-read the question!” (Cai et al.,2021). Five chatbots supported students
to set goals and devise plans for learning, e.g., by scaffolding students to specify their
achievement goals (Hew et al.,2021, 2023) and by guiding goal setting with questions
123

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4503
(Du et al., 2021; Al-Abdullatif et al., 2023). Four chatbots supported students to adapt
to their future studying, e.g., by providing students with the opportunity to monitor
their learning progress (Harati et al., 2021; Oliveira et al., 2021) (Fig. 4).
In all the studies we reviewed authors have reported on using chatbots to pro-
mote SRL processes at conditions, operations, and products, the three cognitive facets
of SRL. For instance, researchers have used chatbots to promote students’ internal
conditions for a task that include activation of domain knowledge (Cai et al., 2021;
Neumann et al., 2021), task interest and motivation (Fryer et al., 2017, 2020;Y i n
et al., 2021), self-efﬁcacy (Chang et al., 2022a), and outcome expectation (Hew et al.,
2021)). Researchers have also utilised chatbots to support students to leverage exter-
nal conditions for a task. For example, chatbots recommended learning resources to
students (Bailey et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2022b), and guided students to manage
their studying time (Harati et al., 2021) and to understand task requirements Du et al.
(2021); Mellado-Silva et al. ( 2020); Chen et al. ( 2020)). We also found that in 17
studies chatbots supported students to engage in cognitive operations of assembling.
These include integrating and consolidating conceptual knowledge in math (Cai et al.,
2021), English language learning (Fryer et al., 2017; Xia et al., 2023), physical sci-
ences (Deveci Topal et al., 2021) and accounting (Mellado-Silva et al., 2020). Nine
chatbots provided support for cognitive operations of translating. These include guid-
Fig. 4 V enn diagram showing the number of studies over SRL phases
123

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
4504 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
ing students to transform knowledge from readings into a written narrative (Bailey
et al., 2021) and to apply knowledge in a practical project (Kumar, 2021). 13 chatbots
provided support for metacognitive operations of monitoring. These include guiding
students to monitor for domain knowledge acquisition (Harati et al.,2021), for learning
goals and responses to questions (Hew et al., 2021), for learning strategy employment
(Song & Kim, 2021) and for progress and performance (Cai et al., 2021; Neumann
et al., 2021; Oliveira et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023a, b). Five chatbots provided sup-
port for searching operations. These include guiding students to search for course
materials and learning content (Chang et al., 2022a, b; Oliveira et al., 2021), for spe-
ciﬁc learning strategies (Du et al., 2021) and for learning tools (Jones & Castellano,
2018). And one chatbot included support for a cognitive operation of rehearsing by
guiding students to formulate acquired knowledge in their own words (Jeon, 2021).
Next, we found that the most common learning products that students created while
studying with chatbots were answers to questions on tests/quizzes (Cai et al., 2021;
Chang et al., 2022b; Jeon, 2021), and only a few chatbots have supported students
to produce essays (Neumann et al., 2021), thesis statements (Lin & Chang, 2020),
project reports (Kumar, 2021) and learning goals (Du et al., 2021).
Further, 16 chatbots in the corpus we reviewed have appeared to provide support
for learning processes theorised to occur at the evaluations facet of SRL. For instance,
chatbots utilised in Cai et al. ( 2021), Oliveira et al. ( 2021), Zhang et al. ( 2023a) and
Lin and Chang ( 2020) assisted students to engage in judgment of learning, whereas
chatbots in Jones and Castellano ( 2018), Hew et al. (2021), Song and Kim (2021) and
Yin et al. ( 2021) promoted student engagement in self-reﬂection. Last, 14 chatbots
provided a guidance to students to better comprehend task standards. Speciﬁcally,
these chatbots provided students with initial explanations of task requirements and
other task features (Bailey et al., 2021; Lin & Chang, 2020; Jones & Castellano, 2018;
Chen et al., 2020), task-related tips (Tian et al., 2021), opportunities for progress
check relative to task topics (Harati et al., 2021), and questions for goal setting (Du
et al.,
2021; Hew et al., 2023). We provide the summary table of the SRL phases and
facets supported by the educational chatbots included in this review in the appendix
(Figs. 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9).
4.3 RQ2: To what extent the use of educational chatbots improved students’ SRL
processing and learning performance?
Among the publications reviewed, we found mixed effects of educational chatbots
on students’ SRL processes and learning performance. In terms of promoting SRL
processing, researchers have reported that students who studied with chatbots tended
to: use more effective learning strategies (Bailey et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2022b;
Mellado-Silva et al., 2020), increase their awareness of the importance of setting
learning goals (Du et al., 2021; Hew et al., 2023), control the learning process over
their study pace (Yin et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2021), enhance their learning engage-
ment and self-efﬁcacy (Chang et al., 2022a; Hew et al., 2021; Oliveira et al., 2021),
and transfer some of their SRL skills to a new learning activity (Jones & Castellano,
2018). Researchers have also found that students who studied with a chatbot did not
123

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4505
sustain well their interest in task, attributed to the novelty effect (Fryer et al., 2017),
and did not increase their SRL processing (Harati et al., 2021). Moreover, the use of
chatbot in one of the studies did not appear to statistically signiﬁcantly boost student
internal conditions, i.e., need for cognition, perception of learning, creativity, self-
efﬁcacy and motivational beliefs – conditions critical for productive SRL (Kumar,
2021). The systematic review also shows that chatbots were used to improve students’
learning performance in tasks spanning different subjects, including English as a sec-
ond language (Bailey et al., 2021), obstetrics (Chang et al., 2022a), physical education
(Chang et al., 2022b), science (Deveci Topal et al., 2021), accounting (Mellado-Silva
et al., 2020), geography (Jones & Castellano, 2018) and educational psychology (Lin
& Chang, 2020; Kumar, 2021). We also note that the use of chatbot had limited effects
on learning performance of students working on a chemistry task (Harati et al., 2021),
and statistically non-signiﬁcant effects on performance of students working on tasks
in math (Cai et al., 2021), computer science (Oliveira et al., 2021) and geography
(Jones & Castellano, 2018). We summarised descriptive and inferential statistics on
SRL processes and learning performance across the reviewed studies in the appendix
(Figs. 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9).
5 Discussion
Even though chatbot is not a new technology, our results indicate that the application
of chatbots for promoting SRL has only recently attracted attention from educational
researchers and practitioners, i.e., over 90% of the papers in the reviewed corpus
were published after 2020. Unlike some other educational technologies that have been
widely researched as support for student SRL over the past decade – e.g., intelligent
tutoring systems (Duffy & Azevedo, 2015; Dever et al., 2023; Taub et al., 2021) and
computer-based scaffolding environments (Molenaar et al., 2012; Srivastava et al.,
2022; Lim et al., 2023) – the use of chatbots to this purpose appears yet to be more
deeply explored.
The two most prominent chatbot architectures in the reviewed corpus were NLP-
driven and rule-based chatbots. NLP-driven chatbots utilize NLP and machine learning
methods to derive the meaning from user input and understand user intents. Even
though the NLP-driven models often require extensive training before they can be
applied, chatbots based on this architecture typically offer more robustness in inter-
preting insufﬁciently clear and grammatically incorrect student inputs. We found
DialogFlow to be a commonly used NLP platform powering NLP-driven chatbots
for SRL (Deveci Topal et al., 2021; Bailey et al., 2021). On the other hand, rule-based
chatbots use a set of predeﬁned rules, e.g., a tree-like decision ﬂow, to map student
input to appropriate chatbot response. These rules are created after anticipating users’
input and pre-scripted during the bot design. Rule-based chatbot provides better behav-
ior control and may be a particularly applicable architecture for researchers aiming
to explicitly map user inputs to SRL processes, e.g., “What should I do ﬁrst?” can be
mapped to goal setting, and, based on that, chatbot may provide a series of prompts to
guide a learner to set their goals. In this review, researchers utilised chatbots to sup-
port learning in a very diverse set of educational domains (i.e., 15 different domains
123

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
4506 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
identiﬁed in our corpus) and this ﬁnding aligns with ﬁndings from the previously
conducted literature reviews (Winkler & Söllner, 2018; Pérez et al., 2020;S m u t n y&
Schreiberova, 2020) that also reported that researchers tended to apply educational
chatbots in diverse domains. The main reason for this cross-domain popularity of
chatbots may be because this technology was designed to adapt to conversation with
different users and on different topics.
Educational chatbots for self-regulated learning have mainly supported learners’
processes at one or two phases of the Winne and Hadwin model of SRL. Our ﬁndings
suggest that the current design and implementation of educational chatbots lack the
ability to aid the whole SRL cycle and thus provide students with comprehensive SRL
support addressing all the four phases of SRL deﬁned in Winne and Hadwin ( 1998)
and Winne ( 2018). Commonly, almost all of the reviewed chatbots were designed
to promote the enactment of learning tactics and strategies that educators deemed
to be important for success in different learning tasks. For example, in the writing
thesis statement task (Lin & Chang, 2020), educators may guide students to strategi-
cally engage the following learning activities “identify relevant passage” → “identify
claims” → “compose thesis statement” → “evaluate your conceptual understanding”
→ “revise thesis statement”. The bot was designed to provide guidance to students on
these activities, in any order they prefer. For this reason, utterances between learners
and chatbots have been often mapped to speciﬁc learning tactics to reinforce the learn-
ing of students, taking into account required learning activities. In this way, chatbots
have served as a potentially effective supplement to traditional classroom teaching,
the trend also identiﬁed in the previous literature (Pérez et al., 2020). This ﬁnding
ties with another ﬁnding from our review showing that chatbots mainly supported
operations of rehearsing, assembling and translating, i.e., cognitive operations that are
typically contingent upon task conditions (Winne, 1995), such as integrate informa-
tion from several readings in an essay or recap a math formula in a quiz. Together,
these ﬁndings may suggest that design of SRL chatbots was primarily informed by the
nature of speciﬁc learning tasks, e.g., persuasive writing, numerical conversion and
software programming, and, as such, dependent upon expected sequences of actions
that learners should take to address those tasks.
To a lesser extent, chatbots supported students to metacognitively evaluate their
immediate and past studying, and to adapt their studying accordingly. For instance, by
using interactive and personalised feedback from chatbots the students were afforded
the opportunity to engage in judgement of learning (Cai et al., 2021; Chang et al.,
2022b; Lin & Chang, 2020; Oliveira et al., 2021), and evaluate and adapt learning
strategies they used during the task. In two of the studies, engagement in metacog-
nitive judgement of learning was reported to be associated with increased student
engagement in critical thinking (Chang et al., 2022b) and writing performance (Lin
& Chang, 2020), further conﬁrming the potential of educational chatbots to support
student metacognition, which is considered to be one of the central processes for
productive SRL (Winne, 2018). Students’ internal conditions such as motivation, self-
efﬁcacy, and interest in a task, are often measured using self-report questionnaires,
interviews and self-reﬂection prompts administered before or after the learning ses-
sion. Data that dynamically capture student internal conditions as they evolve during
the session is rarely collected, making it hard for educational technologies to pro-
123

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4507
vide immediate support adaptive to learning conditions. Even though some chatbots
we reviewed have demonstrated ability to promote internal conditions, e.g., learn-
ing motivation (Yin et al., 2021), perception of learning (Neumann et al., 2021) and
self-efﬁcacy (Chang et al., 2022a), the capability of educational chatbots to provide
responses sensitive to evolving internal conditions remains limited. We also note that
many chatbots in the reviewed corpus supported students to search for, gather and
access learning resources for their tasks. As chatbots have been traditionally used
in dialogue systems for customer service and information acquisition (Serban et al.,
2017; Winkler & Söllner, 2018), we speculate the popularity of this feature in educa-
tional chatbots may have been naturally inherited from the ﬁeld of customer service
and adapted to support students as they gather learning content. Moreover, the recent
explosion of advanced generative language models that generate sophisticated human-
like responses and engage in natural language conversations, such as ChatGPT, has
opened up new possibilities to improve educational chatbots from being tools mainly
used for information acquisition to a powerful pedagogical tools that can revolution-
ize how students learn by offering personalized learning experiences and real-time
guidance adapted to the student’s learning skills and knowledge of content.
We found that chatbots in the reviewed studies generally promoted increase in pro-
ductive SRL processes and learning performance of students across different domains,
conﬁrming the potential of this technology to support SRL. Non-signiﬁcant effects
were identiﬁed in a group of studies and we attribute this ﬁnding to several possi-
ble reasons. Student motivation and engagement in learning sessions facilitated with
chatbot may have dropped as many students may feel isolated in such learning con-
text and may prefer direct support from teachers instead (Zhang et al., 2020). This
may further lead to challenges in sustaining students’ learning interest in a task, as
indicated in one of the reviewed studies (Fryer et al., 2017). As the reviewed chatbots
have mainly supported university students, it may be expected that many students in
this population already possessed a preferred catalogue of learning strategies and that
one-time session with chatbot may not be sufﬁcient to help those students alter their
approaches to learning. Another reason for non-signiﬁcant effects may be related to
chatbot’s challenges to always provide satisfactory and accurate responses, that clearly
target particular learning processes (Deveci Topal et al., 2021).
6 Conclusionandimplicationsforfurtherstudies
The ﬁndings of this systematic literature review indicate the increasing interest of
researchers in using educational chatbots to support self-regulated learning. The
reviewed studies predominantly employed NLP-driven and rule-based chatbot archi-
tectures. Both architectures have shown potential in promoting various processes in
SRL, particularly in the enactment of learning strategies and cognitive operations such
as assembling, translating, and monitoring. Despite these advancements, the review
identiﬁes signiﬁcant gaps in the comprehensive support of SRL. None of the chatbots
have provided SRL support across all the four phases of SRL, as proposed by Winne
and Hadwin Winne and Hadwin ( 1998). The support often involved guiding students
through the steps within speciﬁc learning tasks rather than offering a holistic support
123

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
4508 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
to student SRL processing. The effects of chatbots on students’ SRL processes and
learning performance appeared to be mixed. While many studies reported improve-
ments in the use of learning strategies, student engagement, and self-efﬁcacy, others
found limited or non-signiﬁcant effects on learning performance.
Based on the ﬁndings from this systematic literature review, we propose the fol-
lowing areas of investigation towards advancing research on chatbots and SRL.
1. Create chatbots that provide a comprehensive SRL support across all the phases
Our results suggest that, to date, there has been no chatbot designed to provide
a comprehensive support across all the four phases of SRL deﬁned in the Winne
and Hadwin model. For instance, even though student engagement in goal settings,
planning, and adaptation has been widely documented to beneﬁt student learning
experiences and performance (Alessandri et al., 2020;R a k o v i ´c et al., 2022a;R a k o v i c
et al., 2022b), SRL processes at these stages have been rarely supported in the reviewed
corpus, which may partially explain small, insigniﬁcant and limited effects of several
chatbots on student achievements in this review. Within the SRL framework, each
phase builds upon the previous one creating a cyclical process that allows students
to continuously improve their learning strategies and accomplish their learning goals.
Supporting studying in each phase of SRL may provide students with better control
over their learning and may lead to greater academic success, increased conﬁdence
and motivation in one’s ability to learn.
2. Identify speciﬁc learning tasks in which chatbots can provide most effective
support
While it is important to apply chatbots in different subject domains, it is equally
important to identify speciﬁc tasks within those domains where chatbots can be most
effective. By doing so, researchers and educators can ensure that chatbots are used in a
targeted and effective manner, maximizing the impact of this technology on students’
learning experience. In this way, chatbots may help learners develop a catalogue of
task-speciﬁc learning skills and transfer these skills to similar tasks in the future.
3. Evaluate the effectiveness of SRL chatbots in longitudinal studies
Most of the educational chatbots in this review have been evaluated in small scale
studies, e.g., a one-time intervention administered in one class. Such a lack of longitu-
dinal data might impede researchers from gaining a deeper understanding of the long
term beneﬁts of SRL chatbots. Therefore, it may beneﬁt future research in educational
technology and learning sciences if researchers conduct a longitudinal study, e.g., a
study spanning over one or several semesters, to examine the effects of chatbot on the
development of students’ SRL skills over time.
4. Use chatbot to elicit students’ internal conditions
Student internal conditions including prior knowledge, motivation, interest, self-
efﬁcacy, achievement goals, utility value and outcome expectations can have a
signiﬁcant impact on how learners approach and engage with the learning process
(Meece, 2023). However, there are very limited existing efforts in learning analyt-
ics focusing on understanding and eliciting internal conditions (Matcha et al., 2019).
These constructs have been typically measured at the beginning of a learning task.
Since SRL is a dynamic and cyclic process (Panadero, 2017), student internal condi-
tions may often change during the learning session, also affecting other processes that
learners enact. For example, use of effective learning strategies and accomplishment of
123

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4509
some learning goals early in a learning session may increase students’ self-efﬁcacy and
motivation later in the session, compared to what learners reported at the outset of the
session. Given the conversational and interactive nature of chatbots, researchers may
consider using this technology as an instrument that dynamically captures changes in
internal conditions and helps learners to reﬂect on their own learning process, e.g., by
engaging in dialogues with learners, asking questions that gauge students’ understand-
ing, their learning goals and conﬁdence levels, analyzing the content and frequency of
student interactions, providing feedback on their progress, and offering suggestions
for improvement.
5. Record and analyse what students did, not only what they say they did
Digital trace-data, e.g., navigation logs, text annotations and keystrokes, that stu-
dents generate in digital learning environments have been increasingly harnessed to
unobtrusively measure SRL (Fan et al., 2022; Rakovic et al., 2022b; Lim et al., 2023).
For instance, trace-data are often mapped to theorised SRL processes and dynamically
analysed (e.g., by using process mining and natural language processing approaches)
to obtain a more complete picture of student learning behaviors. To our knowledge,
educational chatbots developed to date have mainly gathered information about student
learning in two ways (1) via self-reports, e.g., based on what students said to the bot
they did, and (2) via student performance data, e.g., correct/incorrect answers on a test.
Researchers, however, have identiﬁed several challenges related to those methods. For
example, students self-reports may often be insufﬁciently accurate and biased towards
student beliefs or social desirability (Winne, 2022), whereas performance data often
cannot directly inform the intervention (Arizmendi et al., 2022). Researchers may
consider introducing trace-data as an additional input to SRL chatbots to ensure bots
more accurately monitor student SRL processes as they dynamically unfold and, based
on that, provide students with a more accurate and timely SRL support.
6. Support students at all educational levels
The chatbots in the reviewed corpus have mainly supported university students.
More research is needed to adapt chatbots to cater to the needs of students at other levels
of education, e.g., primary and secondary. Students at different levels of education may
have different learning needs and preferences (Ambrose et al., 2010). By conducting
research and adapting chatbots to cater these speciﬁc needs from different levels of
students, we can ensure that the beneﬁts of educational chatbots are accessible to
students of all developmental stages, potentially creating more effective, engaging and
inclusive learning environment for them. Also, university students have become more
experienced learners and have often formed certain learning habits. This may make it
challenging for the educational chatbot to induce some changes to learning. An early
intervention at a primary or secondary education level could help in preparing students
to better self-regulate their learning at a tertiary education level and throughout life.
7. Improve the effectiveness and accuracy of chatbot responses by harnessing the
potential of large language models and generative AI
In our review, a notable limitation of current educational chatbots is their often
unsatisfactory responses (Deveci Topal et al.,2021), highlighting a gap in understand-
ing users’ intentions and providing relevant support. This indicates that the current
chatbots may have limited ability to interpret users’ intentions and provide adequate
support, which further may hamper student engagement and motivation. Researchers
123

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
4510 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
may utilise the rapidly emerging technologies of generative AI speciﬁcally large lan-
guage models like ChatGPT, that can handle complex language problems, e.g., large
language models such as ChatGPT, to enhance the chatbots’ ability to understand
learners’ intentions and provide appropriate responses in the context of SRL. In this
way, the volume of productive interactions between students and SRL chatbots may
improve student learning experiences and interest in studying with a bot, marking a
step forward in AI-driven education.
AppendixA:Summaryofthereviewedstudies
Fig. 5 Summary table of reviewed chatbot articles including supported SRL stages and facets
123

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4511
Fig. 6 Summary table of reviewed chatbot articles including supported SRL stages and facets
Fig. 7 Summary table of reviewed chatbot articles including supported SRL stages and facets
123

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
4512 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
Fig. 8 Summary table of reviewed chatbot articles including supported SRL stages and facets
Fig. 9 Summary table of reviewed chatbot articles including supported SRL stages and facets
123

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4513
Acknowledgements This work was in part supported by funding from the Australian Research Council
(DP220101209, DP240100069) and Jacobs Foundation.
Author contribution Rui Guan: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft,
Data Curation.
Mladen Rakovi´c: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft, Data Cura-
tion, Supervision.
Guanliang Chen: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Original Draft, Supervision.
Dragan Gaševi´c: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Original Draft, Supervision
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Data availability statement Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or
analyzed during the current study. This systematic literature review is based entirely on data from publicly
available sources. The analysis synthesizes ﬁndings from a wide range of publications, including journal
articles and conference papers, all of which are cited in the references section of this paper. These sources
can be accessed through academic libraries and online databases. Supplementary materials created during
this review, including summary tables (Figs. 5 - 9) and ﬁgures (Figs. 1 - 4), are available upon request.
Declarations
Competing interest The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of
this article.
Financial interest All authors certify that they have no afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization
or entity with any ﬁnancial interest or non-ﬁnancial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in
this manuscript.
Ethical standard This systematic review has been conducted in accordance with the principles of academic
integrity and honesty. All sources have been properly cited, and no copyrighted material has been used
without permission. The review does not involve any original data collection from human or animal subjects,
and therefore, ethical approval was not sought.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
Ait Baha, T., El Hajji, M., Es-Saady, Y ., & Fadili, H. (2023). The impact of educational chatbot on student
learning experience. Education and InformationTechnologies, 1–24.
Al-Abdullatif, A. M., Al-Dokhny, A. A., & Drwish, A. M. (2023). Implementing the bashayer chatbot
in saudi higher education: Measuring the inuence on students’ motivation and learning strategies.
Frontiers in Psychology, 14, 1129070–1129070.
Alessandri, G., Borgogni, L., Latham, G. P ., Cepale, G., Theodorou, A., & De Longis, E. (2020). Self-set
goals improve academic performance through nonlinear effects on daily study performance. Learning
and Individual Differences, 77, 101784.
Allison, D. (2012). Chatbots in the library: Is it time? Library Hi tech, 30 (1), 95–107.
123

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
4514 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
123
Arizmendi, C. J., Bernacki, M. L., Rakovi´c, M., Plumley, R. D., Urban, C. J., Panter, A., Greene, J. A., &
Gates, K. M. (2022). Predicting student outcomes using digital logs of learning behaviors: Review,
current standards, and suggestions for future work. Behavior Research Methods, 1–29.
Ambrose, S. A., Bridges, M. W., DiPietro, M., Lovett, M. C., & Norman, M. K. (2010). How learning
works: Seven research-based principles for smart teaching. John Wiley & Sons.
Azevedo, R. (2018). Using hypermedia as a metacognitive tool for enhancing student learning? the role of
self-regulated learning. In: Educational psychologist(pp. 199–209). Routledge.
Azevedo, R., & Aleven, V . (2013). Metacognition and learning technologies: An overview of current inter-
disciplinary research. International Handbook of Metacognition and Learning Technologies , 1–16.
Azevedo, R., & Hadwin, A. F. (2005). Scaffolding self-regulated learning and metacognition - implications
for the design of computer-based sca olds. Instructional Science, 33(5/6), 367–379.
Azevedo, R., Taub, M., Mudrick, N. V ., Millar, G. C., Bradbury, A. E., & Price, M. J. (2017). Using Data
Visualizations to Foster Emotion Regulation During Self- Regulated Learning with Advanced Learning
Technologies. In J. Buder & F. W. Hesse (Eds.), Informational environments : Effects of use, effective
designs (pp. 225–247). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-64274-110
Bailey, D., Southam, A., & Costley, J. (2021). Digital storytelling with chatbots: Mapping l2 participation
and perception patterns. Interactive Technology and Smart Education, 18 (1), 85–103.
Baker, R., Xu, D., Park, J., Y u, R., Li, Q., Cung, B., & Smyth, P . (2020). The beneﬁts and caveats of using
clickstream data to understand student self-regulatory behaviors: Opening the black box of learning
processes. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 17 , 1–24.
Bjork, R. A., Dunlosky, J., & Kornell, N. (2013). Self-regulated learning: Beliefs, techniques, and illusions.
Annual Review of Psychology, 64, 417–444.
Cai, W., Grossman, J., Lin, Z. J., Sheng, H., Wei, J.T.-Z., Williams, J. J., & Goel, S. (2021). Bandit algorithms
to personalize educational chatbots. Machine Learning, 110 (9), 2389–2418.
Chang, C.-Y ., Hwang, G.-J., & Gau, M.-L. (2022). Promoting students’ learning achievement and self-
efﬁcacy: A mobile chatbot approach for nursing training. British Journal of Educational Technology,
53(1), 171–188.
Chang, C.-Y ., Kuo, S.-Y ., & Hwang, G.-H. (2022). Chatbot-facilitated nursing education. Educational
Technology & Society, 25(1), 15–27.
Chen, H.-L., Vicki Widarso, G., & Sutrisno, H. (2020). A chatbot for learning chinese: Learning achievement
and technology acceptance. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 58 (6), 1161–1189.
Cleary, T. J., & Chen, P . P . (2009). Self-regulation, motivation, and math achievement in middle school:
V ariations across grade level and math context. Journal of School Psychology, 47 (5), 291–314.
Cleary, T. J., Kitsantas, A., Peters-Burton, E., Lui, A., McLeod, K., Slemp, J., & Zhang, X. (2022). Profes-
sional development in self-regulated learning: Shifts and variations in teacher outcomes and approaches
to implementation. Teaching and Teacher Education, 111, 103619.
Cooke, A., Smith, D., & Booth, A. (2012). Beyond pico: The spider tool for qualitative evidence synthesis.
Qualitative Health Research, 22(10), 1435–1443.
Dai, W., Lin, J., Jin, H., Li, T., Tsai, Y . S., Gaševi´ c, D., & Chen, G. (2023). Can large language models
provide feedback to students? A case study on ChatGPT. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on
Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT) (pp. 323-325). IEEE.
Deveci Topal, A., Dilek Eren, C., & Kolburan Geçer, A. (2021). Chatbot application in a 5th grade science
course. Education and Information Technologies, 26 (5), 6241–6265.
Dever, D. A., Sonnenfeld, N. A., Wiedbusch, M. D., Schmorrow, S. G., Amon, M. J., & Azevedo, R. (2023).
A complex systems approach to analyzing pedagogical agents’ scaffolding of self-regulated learning
within an intelligent tutoring system. Metacognition and Learning, 1–33.
Dignath, C., & V eenman, M. V . (2021). The role of direct strategy instruction and indirect activation of
self-regulated learning|evidence from classroom observation studies. Educational Psychology Review,
33(2), 489–533.
Du, J., Huang, W., & Hew, K. F. (2021). Supporting students goal setting process using chatbot: Implemen-
tation in a fully online course. 2021 IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology &
Education (TALE), 35–41.
Duffy, M. C., & Azevedo, R. (2015). Motivation matters: Interactions between achievement goals and agent
scaffolding for self-regulated learning within an intelligent tutoring system. Computers in Human
Behavior , 52, 338–348.

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4515
123
Fan, Y ., Lim, L., van der Graaf, J., Kilgour, J., Rakovi´ c, M., Moore, J., Molenaar, I., Bannert, M., &
Gaševi´c, D. (2022). Improving the measurement of self-regulated learning using multi-channel data.
Metacognition and Learning, 1–31.
Fryer, L. K., Ainley, M., Thompson, A., Gibson, A., & Sherlock, Z. (2017). Stimulating and sustaining inter-
est in a language course: An experimental comparison of chatbot and human task partners. Computers
in Human Behavior , 75, 461–468.
Fryer, L. K., Thompson, A., Nakao, K., Howarth, M., & Gallacher, A. (2020). Supporting self-efﬁcacy beliefs
and interest as educational inputs and outcomes: Framing ai and human partnered task experiences.
Learning and Individual Differences, 80 , 101850.
Greene, J. A., & Azevedo, R. (2007). A theoretical review of winne and hadwin’s model of self-regulated
learning: New perspectives and directions. Review of Educational Research, 77 (3), 334–372.
Gutierrez de Blume, A. P . (2022). Calibrating calibration: A meta-analysis of learning strategy instruction
interventions to improve metacognitive monitoring accuracy. Journal of Educational Psychology,
114(4), 681.
Harati, H., Sujo-Montes, L., Tu, C.-H., Armﬁeld, S. J., & Y en, C.-J. (2021). Assessment and learning in
knowledge spaces (aleks) adaptive system impact on students’ perception and self-regulated learning
skills. Education Sciences, 11 (10), 603.
Hew, K. F., Huang, W., Du, J., & Jia, C. (2021). Using chatbots in ipped learning online sessions: Perceived
usefulness and ease of use. International Conference on Blended Learning , 164–175.
Hew, K. F., Huang, W., Du, J., & Jia, C. (2023). Using chatbots to support student goal setting and social
presence in fully online activities: Learner engagement and perceptions. Journal of Computing in
Higher Education, 35 (1), 40–68.
Illescas-Manzano, M. D., Vicente López, N., Afonso González, N., & Cristofol Rodríguez, C. (2021).
Implementation of chatbot in online commerce, and open innovation. Journal of Open Innovation:
Technology, Market, and Complexity, 7(2), 125.
Jeon, J. (2021). Chatbot-assisted dynamic assessment (ca-da) for l2 vocabulary learning and diagnosis.
Computer Assisted Language Learning , 1–27.
Jivet, I., Scheffel, M., Schmitz, M., Robbers, S., Specht, M., & Drachsler, H. (2020). From students with love:
An empirical study on learner goals, self-regulated learning and sense-making of learning analytics in
higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 47 , 100758.
Jivet, I., Wong, J., Scheffel, M., V alle Torre, M., Specht, M., & Drachsler, H. (2021). Quantum of choice:
How learners’ feedback monitoring decisions, goals and self-regulated learning skills are related.
LAK21: 11th International Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference , 416–427.
Jones, A., & Castellano, G. (2018). Adaptive robotic tutors that support self-regulated learning: A longer-
term investigation with primary school children. International Journal of Social Robotics, 10 (3),
357–370.
Klug, J., Ogrin, S., Keller, S., Ihringer, A., & Schmitz, B. (2011). A plea for selfregulated learning as a
process: Modelling, measuring and intervening.
Kumar, J. A. (2021). Educational chatbots for project-based learning: Investigating learning outcomes for
a team-based design course. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education,
18(1), 1–28.
L i ,Y . ,S h a ,L . ,Y a n ,L . ,L i n ,J . ,R a k o v i ´c, M., Galbraith, K., Lyons, K., Gaševi´c, D., & Chen, G. (2023). Can
large language models write reﬂectively. Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 4, 100140.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100140 .
Lim, L., Bannert, M., van der Graaf, J., Singh, S., Fan, Y ., Surendrannair, S., Rakovic, M., Molenaar,
I., Moore, J., & Gaševi´ c, D. (2023). Effects of real-time analytics-based personalized scaffolds on
students’ self-regulated learning. Computers in Human Behavior , 107547.
Lin, M.P .-C., & Chang, D. (2020). Enhancing post-secondary writers’ writing skills with a chatbot.Journal
of Educational Technology & Society, 23(1), 78–92.
List, A., & Du, H. (2021). Reasoning beyond history: Examining students’ strategy use when completing
a multiple text task addressing a controversial topic in education. Reading and Writing, 34 (4), 1003–
1048.
List, A., & Lin, C.-J. (2023). Content and quantity of highlights and annotations predict learning from
multiple digital texts. Computers & Education, 199 , 104791.
Mageira, K., Pittou, D., Papasalouros, A., Kotis, K., Zangogianni, P ., & Daradoumis, A. (2022). Educational
ai chatbots for content and language integrated learning. Applied Sciences, 12 (7), 3239.

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
4516 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
Matcha, W., Gaševi´c, D., Pardo, A., et al. (2019). A systematic review of empirical studies on learning ana-
lytics dashboards: A self-regulated learning perspective.IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies,
13(2), 226–245.
McCardle, L., Webster, E. A., Haffey, A., & Hadwin, A. F. (2017). Examining students’ self-set goals for
self-regulated learning: Goal properties and patterns.Studies in Higher Education, 42(11), 2153–2169.
McTear, M. (2020). Conversational ai: Dialogue systems, conversational agents, and chatbots. Synthesis
Lectures on Human Language Technologies, 13(3), 1–251.
Meece, J. L. (2023). The role of motivation in self-regulated learning. In Self-regulation of learning and
performance(pp. 25–44). Routledge.
Mellado-Silva, R., Faúndez-Ugalde, A., & Blanco-Lobos, M. (2020). Effective learning of tax regulations
using different chatbot techniques. Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems, 5 (6),
439–446.
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., Altman, D., Antes, G., ...B e r l i n ,J .A . ,e ta l .(2009).
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and metaanalyses: The prisma statement (chinese
edition). Journal of Chinese Integrative Medicine , 7(9), 889–896.
Molenaar, I. (2022). The concept of hybrid human-ai regulation: Exemplifying how to support young
learners’ self-regulated learning. Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 3 , 100070.
Molenaar, I., Roda, C., van Boxtel, C., & Sleegers, P . (2012). Dynamic scaffolding of socially regulated
learning in a computer-based learning environment. Computers & Education, 59 (2), 515–523.
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Pihl, R. O., & Shore, B. M. (2010). Setting, elaborating, and
reecting on personal goals improves academic performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95 (2),
255.
Neumann, A. T., Arndt, T., Köbis, L., Meissner, R., Martin, A., de Lange, P ., & Wollersheim, H.-W. (2021).
Chatbots as a tool to scale mentoring processes: Individually supporting self-study in higher education.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 4, 668220.
Oliveira, E., de Barba, P . G., & Corrin, L. (2021). Enabling adaptive, personalised and context-aware
interaction in a smart learning environment: Piloting the icollab system. Australasian Journal of
Educational Technology, 37(2), 1–23.
Page, M. J., McKenzie, J. E., Bossuyt, P . M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T. C., Mulrow, C. D., Brennan, S.
E., et al. (2021). The prisma 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews.
Systematic Reviews, 10(1), 1–11.
Panadero, E. (2017). A review of self-regulated learning: Six models and four directions for research.
Frontiers in Psychology, 422.
Panadero, E., Klug, J., & Järvelä, S. (2016). Third wave of measurement in the self-regulated learning
ﬁeld: When measurement and intervention come hand in hand. Scandinavian Journal of Educational
Research, 60(6), 723–735.
Pérez, J. Q., Daradoumis, T., & Puig, J. M. M. (2020). Rediscovering the use of chatbots in education: A
systematic literature review. Computer Applications in Engineering Education, 28 (6), 1549–1565.
Perez-Alvarez, R., Jivet, I., Pérez-Sanagustin, M., Scheffel, M., & V erbert, K. (2022). Tools designed to sup-
port self-regulated learning in online learning environments: A systematic review. IEEE Transactions
on Learning Technologies.
Pintrich, P . R. (2000). The role of goal orientation in self-regulated learning. In: Handbook of self-
regulation(pp. 451–502). Elsevier.
Rakovi´c, M., Bernacki, M. L., Greene, J. A., Plumley, R. D., Hogan, K. A., Gates, K. M., & Panter,
A. T. (2022a). Examining the critical role of evaluation and adaptation in self-regulated learning.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 68, 102027.
Rakovic, M., Fan, Y ., V an Der Graaf, J., Singh, S., Kilgour, J., Lim, L., Moore, J., Bannert, M., Molenaar,
I., & Gasevic, D. (2022b). Using learner trace data to understand metacognitive processes in writing
from multiple sources. LAK22: 12th International Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference ,
130–141.
Recommendation, E. C. (2018). Key competences for lifelong learning. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjep.12173
Serban, I. V ., Sankar, C., Germain, M., Zhang, S., Lin, Z., Subramanian, S., . . . Ke, N. R., et al. (2017). A
deep reinforcement learning chatbot. arXiv:1709.02349.
Smutny, P ., & Schreiberova, P . (2020). Chatbots for learning: A review of educational chatbots for the
facebook messenger. Computers & Education, 151 , 103862.
Song, D., & Kim, D. (2021). Effects of self-regulation scaffolding on online participation and learning
outcomes.
Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 53 (3), 249–263.
123

=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518 4517
Srivastava, N., Fan, Y ., Rakovic, M., Singh, S., Jovanovic, J., V an Der Graaf, J., Lim, L., Surendrannair,
S., Kilgour, J., Molenaar, I., et al. (2022). Effects of internal and external conditions on strategies of
self-regulated learning: A learning analytics study.LAK22: 12th International Learning Analytics and
Knowledge Conference, 392–403.
Sweidan, S. Z., Abu Laban, S. S., Alnaimat, N. A., & Darabkh, K. A. (2021). Siaaa-c: A student interac-
tive assistant android application with chatbot during covid-19 pandemic. Computer Applications in
Engineering Education, 29 (6), 1718–1742.
Taub, M., Azevedo, R., Rajendran, R., Cloude, E. B., Biswas, G., & Price, M. J. (2021). How are students’
emotions related to the accuracy of cognitive and metacognitive processes during learning with an
intelligent tutoring system? Learning and Instruction, 72 , 101200.
Theobald, M. (2021). Self-regulated learning training programs enhance university students’ academic
performance, self-regulated learning strategies, and motivation: A meta-analysis. Contemporary Edu-
cational Psychology, 66, 101976.
Tian, X., Risha, Z., Ahmed, I., Lekshmi Narayanan, A. B., & Biehl, J. (2021). Let’s talk it out: A chatbot
for effective study habit behavioral change. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-computer Interaction,
5(CSCW1), 1–32.
Vázquez-Cano, E., Mengual-Andrés, S., & López-Meneses, E. (2021). Chatbot to improve learning punc-
tuation in spanish and to enhance open and exible learning environments. International Journal of
Educational Technology in Higher Education, 18 (1), 1–20.
Weizenbaum, J. (1966). Eliza|a computer program for the study of natural language communication between
man and machine. Communications of the ACM, 9 (1), 36–45.
Winkler, R., & Söllner, M. (2018). Unleashing the potential of chatbots in education: A state-of-the-art
analysis. Academy of Management Annual Meeting (AOM) .
Winne, P . H. (1995). Inherent details in self-regulated learning.Educational Psychologist, 30(4), 173–187.
Winne, P . H. (2018). Theorizing and researching levels of processing in self-regulated learning. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 88 (1), 9–20.
Winne, P . H. (2022). Modeling self-regulated learning as learners doing learning science: How trace data
and learning analytics help develop skills for self-regulated learning. Metacognition and Learning ,
1–19.
Winne, P . H., & Hadwin, A. F. (1998). Studying as self-regulated engagement in learning. in metacognition
in educational theory and practice. Metacognition in Educational Theory and Practice , 277–304.
Wollny, S., Schneider, J., Di Mitri, D., Weidlich, J., Rittberger, M., & Drachsler, H. (2021). Are we there
yet?-a systematic literature review on chatbots in education. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 4 ,
654924.
Wu, E.H.-K., Lin, C.-H., Ou, Y .-Y ., Liu, C.-Z., Wang, W.-K., & Chao, C.-Y . (2020). Advantages and
constraints of a hybrid model k-12 e-learning assistant chatbot. Ieee Access, 8 , 77788–77801.
Xia, Q., Chiu, T. K. F., Chai, C. S., & Xie, K. (2023). The mediating effects of needs satisfaction on
the relationships between prior knowledge and self-regulated learning through artiﬁcial intelligence
chatbot. British Journal of Educational Technology, 54(4), 967–986.
Yin, J., Goh, T.-T., Y ang, B., & Xiaobin, Y . (2021). Conversation technology with micro-learning: The impact
of chatbot-based learning on students’ learning motivation and performance. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 59(1), 154–177.
Zawacki-Richter, O., Marín, V . I., Bond, M., & Gouverneur, F. (2019). Systematic review of research on
artiﬁcial intelligence applications in higher education- where are the educators? International Journal
of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 16 (1), 1–27.
Zhang, J.-H., Zou, L.-C., Miao, J.-J., Zhang, Y .-X., Hwang, G.-J., & Zhu, Y . (2020). An individualized
intervention approach to improving university students’ learning performance and interactive behaviors
in a blended learning environment. Interactive Learning Environments, 28(2), 231–245.
Zhang, R., Zou, D., & Cheng, G. (2023a).Chatbot-based learning of logical fallacies in e writing: Perceived
effectiveness in improving target knowledge and learner motivation(pp. 1–18). Ahead-of-print(ahead-
of-print): Interactive Learning Environments.
Zhang, R., Zou, D., & Cheng, G. (2023b). Chatbot-based training on logical fallacy in eﬂ argumentative
writing. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 17 (5), 932–945.
Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: A social cognitive perspective. In Handbook of self-
regulation(pp. 13–39). Elsevier.
Zimmerman, B. J. (2002). Becoming a self-regulated learner: An overview. Theory Into Practice, 41 (2),
64–70.
123

=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
4518 Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:4493–4518
Zimmerman, B. J. (2013). Theories of self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview and
analysis. Self-regulated Learning and Academic Achievement, 1–36.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
AuthorsandAﬃliations
Rui Guan 1 · Mladen Rakovi´c1 · Guanliang Chen 1 · Dragan Gaševi´c1,2
B Mladen Rakovi´c
mladen.rakovic@monash.edu
Rui Guan
rui.guan@monash.edu
Guanliang Chen
guanliang.chen@monash.edu
Dragan Gaševi´c
dragan.gasevic@monash.edu
1 Centre for Learning Analytics at Monash, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash
University, 25 Exhibition walk, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia
2 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
123