=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hedp20
Download by: [Arizona State University Libraries] Date: 12 February 2016, At: 15:42
Educational Psychologist
ISSN: 0046-1520 (Print) 1532-6985 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hedp20
The ICAP Framework: Linking Cognitive
Engagement to Active Learning Outcomes
Michelene T. H. Chi & Ruth Wylie
To cite this article: Michelene T. H. Chi & Ruth Wylie (2014) The ICAP Framework: Linking
Cognitive Engagement to Active Learning Outcomes, Educational Psychologist, 49:4, 219-243,
DOI: 10.1080/00461520.2014.965823
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.965823
Published online: 28 Oct 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1396
View related articles 
View Crossmark data


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
The ICAP Framework: Linking Cognitive
Engagement to Active Learning Outcomes
Michelene T. H. Chi and Ruth Wylie
Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College
Arizona State University
This article describes the ICAP framework that deﬁnes cognitive engagement activities on
the basis of students’ overt behaviors and proposes that engagement behaviors can be
categorized and differentiated into one of four modes: Interactive, Constructive, Active, and
Passive. The ICAP hypothesis predicts that as students become more engaged with the
learning materials, from passive to active to constructive to interactive, their learning will
increase. We suggest possible knowledge-change processes that support the ICAP hypothesis
and address the limitations and caveats of the hypothesis. In addition, empirical validation
for the hypothesis is provided by examining laboratory and classroom studies that focus on
three speciﬁc engagement activities: note taking, concept mapping and self-explaining. We
also consider how ICAP can be used as a tool for explaining discrepant ﬁndings, dictate the
proper choice of a control condition, and evaluate students’ outputs. Finally, we brieﬂy
compare ICAP to existing theories of learning.
Educators have long recognized that, although students can
learn from receiving information passively, they fare much
better by learning actively. “Active learning” is typically
deﬁned by educational researchers as learning that requires
students to engage cognitively and meaningfully with the
materials (Bonwell & Eison, 1991), to get “ involved with
the information presented, really thinking about it (analyz-
ing, synthesizing, evaluating) rather than just passively
receiving it” (King, 1993, p. 2). Thus, “active” students are
considered to be cognitively “engaged” (Corno & Madi-
nach, 1983), and we use those terms synonymously.
Despite the fact that “active learning” is deﬁned as
engaging cognitively, most of the research on engagement
considers it from the motivational perspective (Blumenfeld,
Kempler, & Krajcik, 2004; Pintrich & De Groot, 1990;
Zimmerman, 1990), the behavioral perspective, or the emo-
tional perspective. When engagement is discussed in moti-
vational terms, it tends to mean the precursor attitude or
interest in getting involved with the learning materials.
Behavioral engagement refers generally to the notion of
participating and addresses large-grained measures, such as
how often students attend class or do homework, whereas
emotional engagement encompasses measures of positive
and negative reactions to teachers, classmates, academics,
and so on. We are not focusing on the precursor stages of
engagement embodied within the motivational perspective,
or the large-grained behavioral and the emotional perspec-
tives; instead, we are focusing on the amount of cognitive
engagement that can be detected by smaller grained behav-
ioral activities while students learn. Although there is some
research on cognitive engagement, it emphasizes broad
notions such as thoughtfulness and willingness to exert the
necessary effort to succeed and master complex skills and
ideas (Fredricks, Blumenfeld, & Paris, 2004).
In this article, the term “learning activities” is used as a
broad term, referring to the large collection of instructional or
learning tasks from which teachers or educational designers
can choose for students to do (e.g., reading, solving problems,
learning to understand charts and diagrams, etc.). We use the
term “engagement” or “engagement activities” to refer to the
way a student engages with the learning materials in the con-
text of an instructional or learning task, reﬂected in the overt
behavior the student exhibits while undertaking an activity,
such as summarizing at the end of each paragraph, either
orally or in written form. We refer to summarizing as an
“engagement activity or behavior” that the student voluntarily
undertakes while learning in the context of an instructional
task. A teacher can, however, design tasks that elicit more or
less engagement from students (e.g., embedding a prompt at
the end of each paragraph to remind students to summarize).
Correspondence should be addressed to Michelene T. H. Chi, Mary Lou
Fulton Teachers College, Arizona State University, P.O. Box 871811, Mail
Code 1811, Tempe, AZ 85287-1811. E-mail: Michelene.Chi@asu.edu
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST, 49(4), 219–243, 2014
Copyright /C211Division 15, American Psychological Association
ISSN: 0046-1520 print / 1532-6985 online
DOI: 10.1080/00461520.2014.965823
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
In short, although “active learning” is a great idea for
overcoming “passive learning,” we have identiﬁed three
concrete practical challenges that teachers may face when
developing lessons that promote “active learning.” First,
broad recommendations such as engage students cogni-
tively, encourage meaningful learning, and get students to
think about it do not tell teachers how to create activities
that overcome “passive learning.” Second, teachers have
few criteria to use in deciding which are the best “active
learning” activities to design and implement. Third, there
are no guidelines for teachers regarding how to best modify
their favorite existing assignments in order to optimize
“active learning.” Although many others have also tackled
the challenge of creating more “active learning” environ-
ments (e.g., Bonwell & Eison, 1991; Bonwell & Suther-
land, 1996; Fink, 2013; Meyers & Jones, 1993; Rosenthal,
1995; Rowles, 2013; Rubin & Herbert, 1998) the frame-
work we introduce in this article can remediate these practi-
cal challenges by providing speciﬁc domain-general
guidelines for creating more engaging lessons as well as
modifying existing activities to increase engagement, using
simple overt measures of behavior to assess the level to
which students are engaged. Moreover, the framework is
empirically grounded and supported by evidence from a
variety of learning activities, domains, and student ages.
This article has three major sections. The ﬁrst section
describes our ICAP framework that deﬁnes engagement in
terms of overt behaviors that students can undertake and
teachers can see. In brief, we propose that there are differ-
ent modes or categories of “active learning,” corresponding
to different overt behaviors that elicit different knowledge-
change or learning processes. Moreover, we propose that
learning activities and their resulting overt engagement
behaviors can be differentiated into one of four modes:
interactive, constructive, active, or passive. Each mode cor-
responds to a different set of underlying knowledge-change
processes, to be elaborated later. Based on the set of knowl-
edge-change processes, each mode predicts a different level
of learning such that the
Interactive mode of engagement
achieves the greatest level of learning, greater than the Con-
structive mode, which is greater than the Active mode,
which in turn is greater than the Passive mode
(I>C>A>P). Thus, the ICAP hypothesis predicts different
levels of learning for different modes of overt behaviors.
Higher levels imply learning with deeper understanding.
Although a preliminary version of this framework has been
presented in the literature (Chi, 2009), this article expands
the framework by explicating the underlying assumptions
more concretely and fully and by clarifying the knowledge-
change processes and the associated changes in knowledge
for each category of activities.
In the second major section, the article describes the
learning outcomes of each mode of overt activity and pro-
vides empirical evidence that supports the predictions made
by the ICAP hypothesis. The evidence we provide in this
article differs from our prior publication in that Chi (2009)
cited evidence primarily from laboratory experiments mea-
suring performances on a variety of tasks including, but not
limited to, learning. In this article, we cite studies that focus
on three explicit engagement activities (note taking, con-
cept mapping, and self-explaining). In addition, we cite
classroom studies in support of the ICAP hypothesis (that
I>C>A>P), showing the relevance of the hypothesis to
classroom learning.
In the third section, we consider several caveats or fac-
tors that may override or violate the ICAP hypothesis. We
also consider new applications of ICAP as a tool for
explaining discrepant ﬁndings, choosing control conditions,
coding student responses, and guiding instructional design.
We also brieﬂy compare this theoretical framework with
other frameworks in the literature.
SECTION 1: A THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK FOR
DIFFERENTIATING ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
ACCORDING TO THE MODE OF OVERT
BEHAVIORS
The ICAP framework, referred to in previous publications
as DOLA for
Differentiated Overt Learning Activities (Chi,
2009; Menekse, Stump, Krause, & Chi, 2013), consists of a
taxonomy that differentiates four modes or categories of
engagement, based on the overt behaviors displayed or
undertaken by students. Each mode of engagement corre-
sponds to several different types of behaviors and to differ-
entiable knowledge-change processes. Based on the
differential knowledge-change processes and the resulting
changes in knowledge they produce, the ICAP framework
generates the hypothesis that predicts different levels of
learning outcomes (see Figure 1). In this section, we
describe the four modes, the assumptions of the ICAP
framework, the knowledge-change processes and the
expected changes in knowledge for each mode, the cogni-
tive outcomes, the ICAP hypothesis, and its predicted learn-
ing outcomes.
A Taxonomy of Four Modes of Overt Engagement
Behaviors
Students’ engagement with learning materials can be opera-
tionalized by the overt (or lack of overt) behaviors they
undertake while learning. Although far from perfect, overt
behaviors are a good proxy to reﬂect different modes of
engagement that teachers can use to ascertain whether a stu-
dent is in fact engaged in a speciﬁc mode for a given activ-
ity. Speciﬁcally, students’ overt behavioral manifestations
can be characterized and differentiated into four behavioral
modes: passive, active, constructive, and interactive. By
our deﬁnition, then, the mode at which students engage can
be seen either during instruction or while students are
220
CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
undertaking speciﬁc instructor-designed learning activities
(see Table 1). The top row of Table 1 shows the four modes
of engagement behaviors, behaviors with their characteris-
tic descriptors such as receiving, manipulating, generating,
and dialoguing. The left column shows three different
instructional contexts: listening to a lecture, reading a text,
and observing a video. The cells of Table 1 list examples of
engagement activities within each mode in the context of
the three instructional tasks.
Table 1 shows that for any instructional task, students
can engage in different modes of activities or different
activities within the same mode. For example, while read-
ing a text or watching a video, students can be engaged in a
passive, active, constructive,o r interactive way depending
on what overt behaviors they do while reading or while
watching a video. As depicted in Table 1, while reading,
students can be reading silently, reading and underlining,
reading and taking notes in one’s own words, or reading
and asking a friend questions about the materials. Similarly,
while reading, students can engage in one of several types
of activities that all ﬁt into a single (e.g., constructive)
mode, such as self-explaining, creating concept maps, and
comparing and contrasting. Thus, instructional tasks are
orthogonal to engagement mode.
Passive mode of engagement. In our taxonomy we
deﬁne a passive mode of engagement as learners being ori-
ented toward and receiving information from the instruc-
tional materials without overtly doing anything else related
to learning. For example, paying attention and listening to a
lecture without overtly doing anything else (i.e., listening
without taking notes) is a passive engagement behavior.
We acknowledge that it is possible for students to be
covertly processing the materials deeply while listening to
a lecture (or observing a video), even though overtly
appearing only to be passively engaged (this point is elabo-
rated later).
In the literature, studies that examine students’ interac-
tions with computer-based learning environments often dis-
criminate students’ engagement in a binary way, in terms
of whether students are oriented toward and paying atten-
tion (i.e., zoning out or being off-task). In these studies
(e.g., see D’Mello, Olney, Williams, & Hays, 2012), “being
engaged” and looking at the instructional materials map to
our passive mode, which is the lowest level of engagement
in our framework.
To differentiate our use of the term passive (as well as
the terms active, constructive, and interactive), these terms
are italicized, whereas the general dichotomy in the litera-
ture of “active” and “passive learning” are in quotes. See
Table 1, column 1, for other passive activities in the context
of other instructional tasks.
Active mode of engagement. Learners’ engagement
with instructional materials can be operationalized as active
if some form of overt motoric action or physical manipula-
tion is undertaken. Using this criterion to characterize
active, laboratory studies in the psychology and cognitive
science literature provide numerous examples of active
overt behaviors, such as rotating objects to inspect parts of
it more carefully (James et al., 2002), looking for objects in
an environment from a description of it (Kastens & Liben,
2007), and so forth. For various performance measures,
active behaviors excel passive behaviors.
ICAPP Framewor
Taxonomy
Iterac/g415ve,
Knowledg
Storing, In
Cogni/g415ve 
Recall, App
ICAP hypo
Interac/g415ve
rk
y of four mo
, Construc/g415ve, Ac/g415ve, Passive
e-change p
negra/g415ng, In
outcomes
ply, Transfe
othesis
 > Construc
odes, their d
rocesses & 
nferring, Co
r, Co-create
/g415ve > Ac/g415
deﬁni/g415ons, a
resul/g415ng ch
-inferring
e
ve > Passive
and assump
hanges in kn
p/g415ons 
nowledge 
FIGURE 1 The ICAP framework consists of a taxonomy of four modes
of activities, their deﬁnitions and assumptions; hypothesized knowledge-
change processes and the resulting changes in knowledge; projected cogni-
tive outcomes; and the ICAP hypothesis of learning outcomes.
TABLE 1
Examples of Learning Activities by Mode of Engagement
PASSIVE Receiving ACTIVE Manipulating CONSTRUCTIVE Generating INTERACTIVE Dialoguing
LISTENING to a lecture Listening without doing
anything else but oriented
toward instruction
Repeating or rehearsing;
Copying solution steps;
Taking verbatim notes
Reﬂecting out-loud;
Drawing concept maps;
Asking questions
Defending and arguing a
position in dyads or small
group
READING a text Reading entire text passages
silently/aloud without doing
anything else
Underlining or highlighting;
Summarizing by copy-and-
delete
Self-explaining;
Integrating across texts;
Taking notes in one’s own
words
Asking and answering
comprehension questions
with a partner
OBSERVING a video Watching the video without
doing anything else
Manipulating the tape by
pausing, playing, fast-
forward, rewind
Explaining concepts in the
video; Comparing and
contrasting to prior
knowledge or other
materials
Debating with a peer about the
justiﬁcations;
Discussing similarities &
differences
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK
221
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
In the context of learning measures, undertaking active
activities have also been shown to exceed passive activities,
such as when students manipulate some parts of the learn-
ing materials, by pointing to or gesturing at what they are
reading or solving (Alibali & DiRusso, 1999), pausing and
rewinding parts of a video tape (in order to review certain
selected parts of the tape; Chi, Roy, & Hausmann, 2008),
underlining certain text sentences that they think are impor-
tant (Katayama, Shambaugh, & Doctor, 2005), copying
some of the problem solution steps (VanLehn et al., 2007),
mixing certain chemical amounts in a hands-on laboratory
(Yaron, Karabinos, Lange, Greeno, & Leinhardt, 2010),
choosing a justiﬁcation from a menu of options (Conati &
VanLehn, 2000), and so forth.
By restricting active activities to those that require some
form of motoric behaviors that cause focused attention while
manipulating, we are distinguishing them from overt activi-
ties that are carried out mindlessly. For example, if students
are asked to read passages out loud in their entirety (Oakhill,
Cain, & Bryant, 2003), then this reading out loud activity is
closer to passive than active because attention was not
focused on some speciﬁc passages or sentences. However, it
is not always clear-cut when focusing is or is not involved
while being active. For example, if students read some parts
of the passages with greater emphasis (such as in a louder
voice), then it would appear that focused attention is involved.
Sometimes it is ambiguous whether an activity should be clas-
siﬁed as passive or active, unless one can determine whether it
causes focused attention.
Constructive mode of engagement. Our taxonomy
deﬁnes constructive behaviors as those in which learners
generate or produce additional externalized outputs or
products beyond what was provided in the learning materi-
als. Thus, a characteristic descriptor of the constructive
mode is generative. To meet the criteria for constructive,
the outputs of generative behaviors should contain new
ideas that go beyond the information given; otherwise such
behaviors are merely active/manipulative. For example, in
a constructive behavior such as self-explaining, learners are
articulating what a text sentence or a solution step means to
them (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989), by
generating inferences that are not explicitly stated in the
text sentence, or providing justiﬁcation for the step. Both
the inferences and the justiﬁcation go beyond the provided
information. If the student’s self-explanation is verbatim to
what was read, then the student is only repeating or self-
explaining actively rather than constructively, because no
new information is provided.
For another example, suppose a student is reading a
worked-out example solution of a physics problem in a
text. If this example solution does not have any diagrams in
it and the student draws a free-body diagram, then the stu-
dent would have constructed an output. On the other hand,
if the solution example had a diagram already and the
student copied it, then the student was being active, because
the diagram was already present.
Constructive activities include activities such as drawing
a concept map (Biswas, Leelawong, Schwartz, & Vye,
2005; Novak, 1990); taking notes in one’s own words
(Trafton & Trickett, 2001); asking questions (Graesser &
Person, 1994); posing problems (Mestre, 2002);
comparing
and contrasting cases (Schwartz & Bransford, 1998); inte-
grating two texts (Rouet, Britt, Mason, & Perfetti, 1996), or
integrating text and diagrams (Butcher, 2006), or integrat-
ing across multimedia resources (Bodemer, Ploetzner,
Feuerlein, & Spada, 2004); making plans (Pea & Kurland,
1984); inducing hypotheses and causal relations (Suthers &
Hundhausen, 2003); drawing analogies (Chinn & Malhotra,
2002); generating predictions (Schauble, Glaser, Duschl,
Schulze, & John, 1995); reﬂecting and monitoring one’s
understanding and other self-regulatory activities (Azevedo
et al., 2006); constructing time lines for historical phenom-
ena (Dawson, 2004), self-explaining (Chi et al., 1989), and
so forth. These behaviors can all be classiﬁed as construc-
tive because they satisfy the criterion that learners generate
some sort of external output such as notes, hypotheses, jus-
tiﬁcations, questions, predictions, self-evaluations, and
time lines, all of which contain additional ideas that go
beyond the original learning materials.
Our use and operational deﬁnition of constructive or
generative is more speciﬁc and concrete than the ways the
terms “constructive” and “constructionism” are used in the
broader literature. In the broader literature, “constructive”
has several meanings. One meaning reﬂects a theoretical
perspective that students should “construct” their own
understanding rather than “being told” or “instructed”
by a teacher (Bruner, 1961; Papert, 1980; Piaget, 1930).
In this context, “constructionism” is contrasted with
“instructionism” (Kafai, 2006). A second use of construc-
tion contrasts “being told” or “direct instruction” with
“discovery learning,” in which students construct the rules
and relations they need. A third use of “constructivism”
aligns more closely with our deﬁnition, in referring to it as
“knowledge construction by the individual,” or “social co-
constructions of knowledge” by two or more individuals.
This view does align with our view of constructive in
assuming that “knowledge is actively constructed by the
learner” (Loyens & Gijbels, 2008, p. 352). However, our
deﬁnition is still more concrete because we operationalize
it explicitly as generating outputs that go beyond the infor-
mation presented.
Besides being more concrete and explicit, by focusing
our deﬁnition from the learner’s perspective, we also un-
confound the role of the instructor from the role of the
learners. For example, it is sometimes assumed that the
“constructivist” perspective is experiencing a backlash in
recent educational literature because at times learners bene-
ﬁt from instructors’ direct scaffolding (Kirschner, Sweller,
& Clark, 2006; Mayer, 2004). However, such ﬁndings are
222
CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
consistent with our framework because instructional scaf-
folding allows students to be more generative in that the
scaffolding often requires the students to respond in a way
that is usually constructive. For example, Chi, Siler, Jeong,
Yamauchi, and Hausmann (2001) argued that tutoring is
effective because many of the tactics used by tutors can be
reframed as prompting or encouraging tutees to construct
knowledge, either through the use of content-free prompts
or scaffolding prompts such as pumping for “what else,”
hinting (“So, it’s kind of leaving out the lungs there?”), and
ﬁll-in-the-blank kinds of requests (such as “OK, and it goes
from the atrium to the [pause]?”). These prompts encourage
students to respond more constructively because they
require more than a yes/no response (which we consider to
be an active response only).
Interactive mode of engagement. The term
“interaction” has been used loosely in the literature to refer
both to interpersonal activities and to characteristics of
human–computer systems (i.e., if a learning environment or
computer-based system expects a response from the user,
and provides feedback to that response, then often it is
labeled an interactive system). In layman’s terminology, to
engage means to interact with a device, a learning environ-
ment, or system without differentiating whether the interac-
tions of the leaner is active or constructive. In this article,
we operationalize interactive behaviors to dialogues that
meet two criteria: (a) both partners’ utterances must be pri-
marily constructive, and (b) a sufﬁcient degree of turn tak-
ing must occur. We do not restrict who the partners can be,
provided that the criteria are met. Examples include a
learner talking with another person who can be a peer, a
teacher, a parent, or computer agent (assuming the com-
puter agent responds in a content-relevant way).
Because being interactive requires that each person of
the group contributes constructively, this means that if two
people interact only in some physical or motoric way with-
out discourse, such as two students copying each other’s
homework solutions, then they are interacting only actively
and not constructively. The available evidence agrees with
our interpretation, in that when two people work together,
learning seems to occur when there is verbal discussion
rather than only motoric or physical interactions (Milrad,
2002). Therefore, for now, we restrict our deﬁnition of
interactive behaviors to discourse or dialoguing (Salomon
& Perkins, 1998).
Are all dialogues the same, and are they all equally inter-
active and beneﬁcial to learning? As previously indicated,
according to the ICAP framework, dialogues are truly inter-
active only if each speaker’s utterances generate some
knowledge beyond what was presented in the original
learning materials and beyond what the partner has said;
thus, both partners need to be constructive. It is in this sense
that interactive subsumes constructive. Damon (1984) and
Rafal (1996) similarly deﬁned dialogues as truly interactive
when they consist of mutual exchanges of ideas between
two individuals resulting in new ideas that neither individ-
ual knew initially nor could generate alone. Such mutual
exchanges of ideas imply that both partners make substan-
tive contributions to the topic under discussion, such as
defending and arguing a position (Schwarz, Neuman, &
Biezuner, 2000), criticizing each other by requesting justiﬁ-
cation (Okada & Simon, 1997), asking and answering each
other’s questions (Webb, 1989), explaining to each other
(Roscoe & Chi, 2007), and elaborating on each other’s con-
tributions (such as clarifying, building upon, correcting,
etc.; Hogan, Nastasi, & Pressley, 1999). This is an ideal
conception of an interactive or joint dialogue pattern in that
both partners make substantive contributions.
In addition to being constructive, a dialogue must have a
sufﬁcient frequency of turn taking to meet our deﬁnition of
interactive. Two students who take turns giving minilec-
tures to each other, even if they are being constructive, will
likely not reap the same beneﬁts as two students who fre-
quently interject to ask each other questions, make clariﬁca-
tions, and so forth. We hypothesize that by frequently
taking turns, it will be easier for students to incorporate
their partners’ understanding of the domain and to make
adjustments to their own mental model, because such
dynamic and ongoing exchanges have the dual advantages
of allowing for more frequent revisions on smaller compo-
nents of knowledge. We have made the same argument for
why self-explaining facilitates learning, because it fosters
ongoing integration of minute pieces of new knowledge
(Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher, 1994, p. 474), and
there is some evidence in support of our claim of the impor-
tance of taking frequent turns (Chi & Kang, 2014).
Another type of dialoguing that is not very interactive is
when one partner dominates and generates most of the sub-
stantive contributions and the other partner merely agrees
or contributes with backchannel responses (e.g., “mmm,”
“uh-huh,” etc.). In such cases, the dominant partner or the
“speaker” may be learning more than his or her “listening”
partner because the “speaker” is being constructive,
whereas the “listener” is simply being active by agreeing
and afﬁrming to some of the “speaker’s” contributions. We
have referred to this pattern of dialoguing as individual dia-
logue (Chi & Menekse, in press). This may explain why
some collaborative learning studies found no advantage of
collaboration over individual learning (Barron, 2003; Yetter
et al., 2006). Thus, individual dialogue pattern tend to pro-
mote more learning for the dominant speaker, whereas both
partners can beneﬁt from joint dialogue pattern.
The same operational deﬁnition of interactions can be
applied to the level of interactivity of a computer-based sys-
tem (such as an intelligent tutoring system or a learning envi-
ronment). Because such systems often require a response
from the student, are they all truly interactive? No, because
our deﬁnition of interaction is learner centered and applies to
the kind of responses that a learner makes. Suppose a
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK 223
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
student’s response to a computer-based learning environment
consists of selecting an answer from a menu of choices;
selecting is only active in our taxonomy in that the student
does not generate a product. Therefore, responses to a so-
called interactive computer-based system can also be classi-
ﬁed as passive, active, constructive,or interactive, depending
on the level of cognitive engagement required of the learners.
Assumptions Underlying the ICAP Taxonomy
Our taxonomy of four modes of overt behaviors requires
eight assumptions that are described next.
Content relevant. First, the classiﬁcation into the four
modes of activities assumes that students are doing activi-
ties that are content relevant. For example, if students are
gesturing as part of an active task (such as when teachers
ask students to point at the important equations on the
whiteboard), if students point instead at random ﬁgures on
the whiteboard, then their behavior would not be considered
a beneﬁcial active one. Similarly, when students are con-
structing or interacting, their outputs or dialogues must be
content relevant for the activity to be considered truly con-
structive or interactive.
Intended versus enacted. Our taxonomy starts with
classifying the intended overt behaviors as designated by
an activity. However, asking students to carry out a behav-
ior does not guarantee that the expected behavior will actu-
ally be carried out in the intended way. For example, if a
student is asked to be constructive by generating a sum-
mary, the student can reduce the task to an active one by
summarizing using a delete-and-copy strategy (i.e., delete
the irrelevant sentences and copy the relevant ones). To
know accurately what mode of behavior a student is carry-
ing out, teachers need to judge the students’ products from
an ICAP perspective (i.e., evaluate the summary).
Besides a mismatch between the intended engagement
mode and the enacted engagement mode (the enacted
behavior), there can also be a misalignment between the
overt display of behavior and the covert processes. For
example, a student may appear to be only actively involved
in learning (such as underlining key concepts in a book)
and yet in reality the student is covertly constructive (such
as thinking deeply about and self-explaining the material).
Nevertheless, we rely on overt manifestations as our mea-
sure of engagement not only because it is the best noninva-
sive measure available but also because it provides
concrete criteria for teachers to use when designing class-
room and homework activities. This design feature of ICAP
is presented in the third section of this article.
Analyzing the outputs. Because there may be a dis-
crepancy between the intended engagement mode and the
enacted engagement mode, a content analysis of learners’
responses is necessary to conﬁrm the actual mode of an
activity. For example, in dialogues, some dyads might
engage in individual dialogue (in which only one partner is
being constructive) instead of in joint dialogue, where both
partners are constructive. As a result, an analysis of the con-
tent of the products or the behavioral transcriptions is nec-
essary to correctly classify an activity. From the teacher’s
perspective, such an analysis might inform how to revise
the activity so that it aligns more with her intention.
Advantages of externalized outputs. Although we
acknowledge that students can be generative covertly with-
out externalizing any outputs, we also assume that there are
practical, cognitive, learning, and epistemic advantages to
externalizing outputs as static products (e.g., notes, dia-
grams). From a practical standpoint, externalized static out-
puts provide performance data for teachers and researchers
to analyze and verify that students are completing the tasks
and doing them in the way intended by the design of the
tasks. From a cognitive perspective, one advantage of exter-
nalizing outputs is that it can help overcome cognitive load
(Sweller, 1994). For example, it is difﬁcult to generate a
large or complex concept map in memory, so ofﬂoading it
externally onto a tablet or paper reduces the memory
requirement. From a learning perspective, the externalized
outputs become new materials that a student can further
examine to infer new knowledge or learn from errors.
Moreover, the process of externalizing provides students
the opportunity to monitor whether in fact they know the
materials. From an epistemic perspective, an advantage to
externalizing outputs is that it commits a student to that
knowledge and gives her a sense of ownership of that
knowledge (Kitchner, 1983).
Greater probability. Our taxonomy assumes that it is
only more likely that the overt behaviors are an approxima-
tion to how the students are actually engaging with the
learning materials most of the time. For example, while lis-
tening to a lecture, if students are doing nothing else
besides orienting and receiving, then it is more likely that
they are engaging passively while listening to the lecture.
We are not claiming that they are engaged passively the
entire time that they are listening (e.g., at times students
could be covertly self-explaining while appearing to be pas-
sive
.) Moreover, even though students may not always
complete an activity in the way it was intended, we assume
that students are more likely to engage with the learning
activity at the prescribed level.
Independence. Although this point was articulated
earlier in the context of deﬁning our taxonomy, this impor-
tant assumption is reiterated here brieﬂy. Engagement
activities are orthogonal to instructional tasks, in that a stu-
dent can undertake various engagement activities while
learning, regardless of how instruction is delivered. Thus,
224
CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
the mode of engagement, referring to what students are
actually doing while being instructed, is independent of the
instruction itself.
Hierarchy. From the way the behavior of each mode is
operationally deﬁned, there is a hierarchy in our taxonomy
so that a higher mode subsumes a lower mode. That is,
interactive behaviors subsume constructive behaviors, and
constructive behaviors subsume active, and active behav-
iors subsume passive. For example, we pointed out earlier
that to meet our deﬁnition of interactive, both partners must
be constructive. Likewise, to be constructive, such as draw-
ing a diagram, one must also be active (i.e., engaging in the
motoric act of drawing). Finally, being active, such as
underlining a sentence in a text, requires that the learner
focuses on and orients toward the underlined sentences,
thus active behavior includes passive.
Intermode boundary. The boundaries between the
modes of activities are not meant to be totally rigid. Obvi-
ously some activities may be difﬁcult to classify and fall on
the boundary between two categories, because accurate
classiﬁcation also depends on the actual cognitive processes
carried out by the student. One of the most difﬁcult activi-
ties to classify is problem solving, because it depends on
how a speciﬁc student is doing it and the context in which it
was taught. For example, solving an algebra problem can
be classiﬁed as an active behavior when the student
matches the conditions of application of an equation and
merely applies the formula of an equation (e.g., plug and
chug). However, solving a novel or more difﬁcult problem
may be classiﬁed as constructive if a student has to rederive
an equation, or reconceptualize certain components of a
problem, such as reconceptualize two masses of a physics
problem (one block on top of another block) as a single
compound body. There are ways to determine more pre-
cisely the students’ cognitive processes when undertaking
an activity in a controlled laboratory setting, but this cannot
be done easily in a classroom setting.
In summary, when these assumptions are met, we assert
that the ICAP taxonomy is a useful and powerful way to
classify engagement activities.
Knowledge-Change Processes Underlying Each
Mode of Engagement and the Expected Changes
in Knowledge
In Chi (2009), we brieﬂy introduced the possible processes
underlying each mode of engagement. In this article, we
elaborate and refer to these engagement processes as
“knowledge-change processes,” then describe (a) what they
are, (b) the assumptions we make with respect to these
knowledge-change processes, (c) the resulting changes in
knowledge, and (d) the expected cognitive and learning
outcomes as a result of the knowledge changes.
Learning is typically conceived of as causing some
changes, and these changes can occur at various grain sizes,
such as systemic changes in terms of people’s participation
in social or cultural activities; behavioral changes in terms
of what people do such as eating a healthier diet; knowl-
edge changes in terms of what people know, causing them
to be able to solve some problems and explain some phe-
nomena; and cellular changes in terms of changes in the
activation patterns of their brain’s neurons. These various
grain sizes of change require different measurements to
detect whether changes have occurred. Because the ICAP
framework is intended to understand how cognitive engage-
ment can enhance an individual student’s learning of com-
plicated school subject matters, the appropriate grain size
to talk about learning is the knowledge level; thus we use
the terms “changes in knowledge” and “knowledge-change
processes” to reﬂect our assessment of students’ under-
standing after learning and the processes by which they
acquired this knowledge.
By our deﬁnition, knowledge-change processes are
dynamic processes that students engage in while learning
new information. We simplify and postulate that there are
four broad types of knowledge-change processes that are
relatively distinct from each other, and each can be associ-
ated with a passive, active, constructive, or interactive
mode of behavior. We ﬁrst summarize the four types of
knowledge-change processes by providing a single-word
label for each.
/C15Store: new information is stored in an isolated way
(passive).
/C15Integrate: new information activates relevant prior
knowledge and while storing, new information is inte-
grated with activated prior knowledge ( active).
/C15Infer: new information is integrated with activated
prior knowledge, and new knowledge is inferred from
activated and integrated knowledge ( constructive).
/C15Co-Infer: Each learner infers new knowledge from
activated and integrated knowledge and iteratively
infers knowledge with new inputs from conversational
partner(s) (interactive).
Processes and changes for passive. In a passive
mode of engagement, the knowledge change processes can
be postulated to be isolated “storing” of the received infor-
mation in an encapsulated manner. Storing information in
an isolated way means that new knowledge is not integrated
with existing or prior knowledge. The consequence of iso-
lated storing of information is that the newly learned encap-
sulated knowledge is “inert” (Whitehead, 1929), meaning
that access to that knowledge is possible only when a spe-
ciﬁc cue to activate it is given, such as an exam question
expected from a speciﬁc chapter (Brown & Palincsar, 1989,
p. 394), or the same context is provided. An example of
encapsulated knowledge can be seen in a protocol snippet
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK 225
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
collected by Scardamalia (1992; cited also in Chi et al.,
1994). A student had read about how blood clots. When the
student was asked to explain how a cut heals, the student
ﬁrst responded in the following way, based on the materials
she had read: “When you get a cut it bleeds. In your blood
there are things called platelets. Platelets made a shield on
your cut, it is called a scab, it protects your skin when it is
healing.” So the student obviously had stored the newly
learned information. After this answer, the student was asked
to use her own theory to answer the same question. Here is
the student’s second response to the same question: “My the-
ory is that when you get a cut the blood vessel that got cut
dies and the heart stops sending blood to that vessel until it
heals.” Thus, the student’s old ideas were not integrated
with the newly learned knowledge, suggesting that the new
ideas were stored in an isolated or encapsulated way.
Processes and changes for active. When students
engage in an active way, such as highlighting key sentences
when reading on a computer screen, such manipulations
can be interpreted as ways of emphasizing certain parts of
the learning materials. Such emphases may cause learners
to activate a body of knowledge (such as a skeletal or par-
tial schema or a mental model) that is relevant to the
emphasized sentences. In addition, once a relevant schema
is activated, learners can assimilate or integrate new infor-
mation into the activated schema, allowing the learner to
ﬁll gaps in the schema, thereby making it more complete
(Bartlett, 1958). Gap ﬁlling is a process that is easily mod-
eled computationally and has been explored extensively
(Conati & Carenini, 2001; VanLehn, Jones, & Chi, 1992).
Processes and changes for constructive. Construc-
tive behaviors often require the processes of “inferring”
(e.g., induce, deduce, and abduce). Inferring also includes
revising, repairing, reorganizing , and reﬂecting. Inferring
can be thought of generally as a process of elaborating,
such as adding more details or qualiﬁcations. Revising and
repairing can be thought of as the processes of changing
what was initially stored but is incorrect. Reorganizing can
be changing hierarchical relations, or pattern of relation-
ships. In contrast, reﬂecting may require a student to evalu-
ate what she or he does or does not understand in order to
carry out a constructive activity such as generating a
question.
Finally, constructive activities also occur when learners
integrate various parts of the learning materials (including
comparing, combining/linking, discriminating/contrasting
information from disparate sources or different paragraphs
within a passage, reasoning analogically, etc). Thus, the
knowledge-change processes of constructive activities can
involve multiple types of inferring processes.
Processes and changes for interactive. As
described previously, individuals interacting in dialogues
can participate in individual or joint dialogue patterns,
but only the joint patterns are truly interactive. In these
interactive joint dialogues, each member of the dyad must
be constructive while interacting, thereby engaging in the
cognitive processes of activating, integrating , and infer-
ring. But in addition, in joint dialogues, each speaker’s stor-
ing, activating, integrating , and inferring processes further
beneﬁt from the contributions provided by a peer, such as
their elaborations, feedback, suggestions, and perspectives.
Next is a hypothetical example of such co-inferring
processes.
Suppose Alice (Learner A) and Bob (Learner B) are both
exposed to base instructional information that they both
encode (Knowledge 1) and are collaboratively learning.
Alice starts the interaction by activating her own prior
knowledge relevant to Knowledge 1 (Schema A) and makes
an inference from Schema A (Inference 1). Alice shares
Inference 1 with Bob, which is information that goes
beyond what was originally presented in Knowledge 1. Bob
then activates his own schema (Schema B) relevant to
Knowledge 1 plus Inference 1, and based on his Schema B,
makes an inference (Inference 2) that goes beyond the orig-
inal Knowledge 1 C Inference 1. Alice can now make an
inference and contribution based on Inference 2, plus the
original presented Knowledge 1, and her own Inference 1.
So in continued interactions, partners beneﬁt from the infer-
ences of their partners, and each subsequent inference can
incorporate the inferences made by the other partner as
well as integrating it with one’s own contributions and
inferences. Thus, the advantage of such co-inferring pro-
cesses is that each partner can beneﬁt from the inferences
of the other partner in a cumulative and spiraling way.
In general, the knowledge-change processes for each
higher mode subsume the processes for the lower mode, in
the same way that the behavior for the higher modes sub-
sumes the behavior of the lower modes.
Assumptions Underlying Knowledge-Change Processes
Just as we made assumptions regarding the classiﬁcation of
overt engagement behaviors, we also made a number of
assumptions regarding the possible underlying knowledge-
change processes as involving storing information in an
isolated way, activating prior relevant knowledge,
integrat-
ing new information with prior knowledge, and/or making
inferences from it. Of course, this can be done in various
permutations and repetition of storing, integrating, and
inferring, either doing it alone or with a peer. Our main
assumption is not whether we have postulated accurately
the knowledge-change processes for each mode but rather
that they are relatively different for each mode. Besides this
main assumption that engaging behaviors elicit these dis-
tinct fundamental knowledge-change processes, there are
three other important assumptions about the nature of
knowledge-change processes.
226
CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Distinct from learning processes. The ﬁrst assump-
tion is that knowledge-change processes underlying
engagement are distinct from the cognitive processes of
learning in the context of a speciﬁc instructional/learning
task itself, such as solving a problem or understanding a
diagram or reading a passage. For example, the cognitive
processes involved in the learning task of problem solving
includes creating and searching a problem space, whereas
the processes of understanding a diagram might include
perceiving the spatial relations among the components,
mentally rotating the angles in the diagram, and the pro-
cesses of reading include decoding and identifying word
meaning. These processes, unique to the speciﬁc learning
tasks of solving problems, understanding diagrams, and
reading, are distinct from the knowledge-change processes
of engagement activities such as storing, integrating, and
inferring while engaged in self-explaining or drawing a dia-
gram. Our assumption is that the knowledge-change pro-
cesses of storing, integrating, and inferring, supplement
these task-speciﬁc learning processes.
Same set of knowledge-change processes. The
second assumption is that, although the types of activities
within each mode may be different (e.g., in reading a text,
the various active engagement activities could be underlin-
ing text sentences or summarizing by deleting irrelevant
sentences), their underlying knowledge-change processes
are the same. That is, underlining text sentences causes the
learner to focus attention on the underlined sentences in the
same way that deleting irrelevant sentences when produc-
ing a text summary causes the learner to focus attention on
the remaining sentences of the summary. Although the
activities of underlining and summarizing are different,
the knowledge-change process of focusing attention is the
same. As another example, for constructive activities such
as self-explaining and drawing a concept map, the knowl-
edge-change processes for both activities include integrat-
ing and inferring new knowledge. It is precisely the
similarity in the knowledge-change processes for each
mode of engagement that allows us to generalize our pre-
dictions of learning outcomes as a function of the mode of
engagement across various activities, to be explained next.
Cognitive outcomes resulting from the knowledge-
change processes. Finally, we assume that different
knowledge-change processes cause different changes in
one’s knowledge, resulting in different cognitive outcomes,
such as being able to recall, apply, transfer, and co-create.
For example, if a student has only learned the material in
an encapsulated way (i.e., the information was stored in an
isolated way while learning), then the student can only
recall facts. The cognitive outcome for each of the four
modes is elaborated in the next section along with the learn-
ing outcomes. Thus, we attribute the outcome of learning to
the way information was initially learned and the changes
in knowledge resulting from it.
In Table 2, the ﬁrst row (labeled Example activities)
gives two examples of behaviors in each mode, the second
row postulates the underlying knowledge-change processes
for each mode of engagement, and the third row postulates
the expected changes to the knowledge as a result of the
engagement processes undertaken.
A Hypothesized Order of Learning Outcomes:
Interactive>Constructive>Active>Passive (ICAP)
The preceding section described the underlying knowledge-
change processes postulated for each mode of activity
(summarized in the second row of Table 2), and the associ-
ated knowledge changes expected for each mode (the third
row of Table 2). On the basis of these knowledge changes,
different cognitive and learning outcomes will result. In
this section, we describe the expected relative cognitive
and learning outcomes for each engagement mode, result-
ing in a hypothesis about learning that is referred to as
ICAP (as shown in the fourth and ﬁfth rows of Table 2).
For passive activities, because new knowledge is
encoded in an isolated or encapsulated way during learning,
the outcome is that such inert knowledge can be retrieved
and recalled, but only when relatively the same cue or con-
text is given. Such isolated storing is adequate for learning
that does not require integration with prior knowledge, such
as learning a speciﬁc procedure of how to operate an ATM
machine. Knowledge stored in an isolated way can be
retrieved and reused later when the same context is pro-
vided (such as seeing another similar ATM machine). It
can also be retrieved when using episodic tags. For exam-
ple, a student might be able to solve a problem like the one
the teacher worked out at the blackboard if the student was
reminded that it is the problem demonstrated last Tuesday.
For active activities in which students manipulate infor-
mation while learning, this manipulation causes them to
activate the relevant prior knowledge corresponding to the
emphasized information (such as a related schema). This
then allows them to assimilate and ﬁll gaps in their schema,
making their activated schema more complete and strength-
ened. Students can more readily retrieve the knowledge and
apply it in new context, such as when solving problems
somewhat similar to what they have learned, explaining
similar concepts, and so forth. In short, learning with active
engagement can be quite substantial because signiﬁcant
knowledge completion has occurred. One could say that
they have achieved, at minimum, a shallow understanding.
For constructive activities, because learners typically
generate inferences and relations for conceptual knowledge,
and rationales and justiﬁcations for procedural knowledge,
not only does their knowledge or schema become more
complete and strengthened, but in fact their schema can be
more enriched and coherent because it can be substantially
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK 227
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
revised (accommodated), and perhaps more interconnected
or linked with other schemas, facilitating transfer. Thus the
knowledge structure changes substantially. One example of
accommodation is the change from conceiving of the
human circulatory system as a “single-loop” to a “double-
loop” model (Chi et al., 1994). Learners can achieve
such accommodation changes in their knowledge structure
from constructively engaging with the materials (e.g.,
self-explaining).
In the context of conceptual domains, more enriched and
interconnected understanding can provide generalizations
of explanations, reasoning analogically, and so forth. In the
context of procedural domains, providing justiﬁcations and
rationales allows the procedures to be transferred and used
in a new context. Thus, knowledge-change processes from
constructive activities can deepen one’s understanding of
the materials to facilitate transfer. Transfer is difﬁcult to
achieve, as pointed out in a 2012 special issue on transfer
(Goldstone & Day, 2012).
Finally, for interactive activities, the changes in knowl-
edge as a consequence of reciprocally constructive or co-
inferring interaction is that each peer’s alternative perspec-
tives, guidance, and challenges will improve and expand
each other’s knowledge in a cyclical dynamic way. In suc-
cessful dialoguing, the contributions of each peer incorpo-
rate the inferences of their partner, potentially resulting in
new knowledge that neither partner could have created
alone. The resulting changes in knowledge are that novel
and innovative ideas and perspectives may emerge that nei-
ther peer originally knew and could not have generated
while working independently. So one could say that learn-
ers in this mode have achieved the deepest understanding
and can perhaps co-create innovations.
As previously described, the different learning outcomes
that we have postulated for each mode can be mapped or
translated into differing levels of learning, such as minimal
understanding, shallow understanding, deep understanding,
and deepest understanding (as shown in the last row of
TABLE 2
Example Activities, Knowledge-Change Processes, Knowledge Changes, Cognitive Outcomes, and Learning Outcome by Mode of Engagement
CATEGORY Characteristic PASSIVE Receiving ACTIVE Manipulating CONSTRUCTIVE Generating INTERACTIVE Dialoguing
Example activities Listening to explanations;
Watching a video
Taking verbatim notes;
Highlighting sentences
Self-explaining;
Comparing and contrasting
Discussing with a peer;
Drawing a diagram with a
partner
Knowledge-change
processes
Isolated “storing” processes in
which information is stored
episodically in encapsulated
form without embedding it
in a relevant schema, no
integration
“Integrating” processes in
which the selected &
emphasized information
activates prior knowledge &
schema, & new information
can be assimilated into the
activated schema.
“Inferring” processes include:
integrating new information
with prior knowledge;
inferring new knowledge;
connecting, comparing &
contrasting different pieces
of new information to
infer new knowledge;
analogizing, generalizing,
reﬂecting on conditions of a
procedure, explaining why
something works.
“Co-inferring” processes
involve both partners taking
turns mutually creating. This
mutuality further beneﬁts
from opportunities &
processes to incorporate
feedback, to entertain new
ideas, alternative
perspectives, new directions,
etc.
Expected changes
in knowledge
New knowledge is stored, but
stored in an encapsulated
way.
Existing schema is more
complete, coherent, salient,
and strengthened.
New inferences create new
knowledge beyond what was
encoded, thus existing
schema may become more
enriched; procedures may be
elaborated with meaning,
rationale and justiﬁcations;
and mental models may be
accommodated; and schema
may be linked with other
schemas.
New knowledge and
perspectives can emerge
from co-creating knowledge
that neither partner knew.
Expected cognitive
outcomes
Recall: knowledge can be
recalled verbatim in
identical context (e.g., reuse
the same procedure or
explanation for identical
problems or concepts).
Apply: knowledge can be
applied to similar but non-
identical contexts (i.e.,
similar problems or
concepts that need to be
explained)
Transfer: knowledge of
procedures can be applied to
a novel context or distant
problem; knowledge of
concepts permit
interpretation &
explanations of new
concepts.
Co-create: knowledge and
perspectives can allow
partners to invent new
products, interpretations,
procedures, and ideas.
Learning outcomes: ICAP Minimal understanding Shallow understanding Deep understanding, potential
for transfer
Deepest understanding,
potential to innovate novel
ideas
228 CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Table 2). Thus, an interactive mode of engagement (I) can
enhance learning more than a constructive (C) mode, which
is better than an active (A) mode, which in turn is better
than a passive (P) mode. In short, we hypothesize that the
relative learning levels will be ordered more or less in
the direction of I >C>A>P. Although we could generate
the ICAP hypothesis from the hierarchical nature of the
behavior modes alone, postulating reasonable underlying
knowledge-change processes for each mode and then see-
ing their hierarchical nature provide further validity to the
hypothesized order of the I >C>A>P hypothesis.
SECTION 2: EMPIRICAL VALIDATION OF THE ICAP
HYPOTHESIS
To recap, the ICAP framework deﬁnes and differentiates
different modes of overt behaviors, postulates the underly-
ing knowledge-change processes, and the learning out-
comes for each mode. The learning outcomes can be
predicted to vary from minimal, to shallow, to deep, and
deepest. The ICAP hypothesis postulates that learning is
enhanced to the greatest degree with interactive behaviors,
followed next by constructive behaviors, followed next by
active behaviors, and followed last by passive behaviors.
Because the entire ICAP framework and its associated
ICAP hypothesis is conceptually derived, it is essential to
seek empirical validation of the hypothesis.
In our prior paper (Chi, 2009), evidence in support of the
hypothesis consisted of a random assortment of mostly lab-
oratory studies that examined a variety of tasks that partici-
pants could undertake, using a variety of outcome
measures. The prior paper included studies that can be
interpreted to be making pairwise comparisons between
two modes of engagement. In this article, we present four
types of additional evidence in support of the ICAP hypoth-
esis. First, we present the results of a study from our lab
that compared all four modes of learning, as the strongest
test of the ICAP hypothesis. Second, we present two studies
from the literature that compared three of the four ICAP
modes. Third, we present additional studies that made pair-
wise comparisons between engagement modes ( passive,
active, constructive, and interactive) for three speciﬁc
engagement activities: taking notes, creating concept maps,
and self-explaining. For example, we look at the learning
differences between self-explaining enacted in an active
way compared to self-explaining enacted in a constructive
mode. Finally, we present evidence from classroom studies.
Thus, all the supporting evidence presented in this article
comes from studies that were not cited in the prior paper.
A Study With Four Modes of Engagement
We have undertaken a study in our lab that included all four
modes of engagement in the domain of materials science
(Menekse et al., 2013). Aside from reading a short passage
of background knowledge, the four modes or conditions
consisted of reading a text passage ( passive); reading and
highlighting important sentences within the text (active);
interpreting a graph that described the information con-
tained in the text passage but without having read the text
passage ( constructive); and interpreting the same graph
jointly with a peer ( interactive), again without having read
the text passage. The learning outcomes, comparing pretest
and posttest for each condition, are shown in Figure 2.
These results support the ICAP hypothesis and show that
learning improves signiﬁcantly at a rate of around 8% to
10% across each mode.
Two Studies With Three Modes of Engagement
In addition to the study we conducted that included all four
modes of engagement, we found two studies the instruc-
tional conditions of which can be interpreted to fall across
three modes of engagement according the ICAP frame-
work. One lab study (Coleman, Brown, & Rivkin, 1997),
within the domain of evolutionary biology, consisted of a
three-person learning context in which each student took
one of three different roles and the roles rotated. Speciﬁ-
cally, the three roles were listening to another student
(which we categorize as being passive because the overt
behavior is receptive in nature), summarizing (which we
categorize as active because they report that the protocols
revealed that in many of the summaries participants did not
go beyond the given text; Coleman et al., 1997, p. 360), or
explaining the materials ( constructive). Although the study
did include an additional factor of whether or not students
prepared their summaries and explanations with the intent
to teach, we do not consider this an interactive activity
because while teaching, their partners were instructed only
to listen and not ask questions. Thus we averaged the scores
across this factor for summarize-to-self and summarize-to-
other to create an overall summarize score (and repeated
this process for the explaining-to-self and explaining-to-
other conditions). We plotted these new averages, and the
results show the outcomes of students in each of these three
roles, for two measures of near transfer and one measure of
far transfer. Figure 3 shows that students did increasingly
better from passive to active to constructive.
A second study that can also be reinterpreted to have
manipulated three of the four modes of active learning was
conducted in the domain of plate tectonics (Gobert & Clem-
ent, 1999). They compared learning gains among students
who studied by drawing diagrams from text ( constructive),
writing summaries of the text ( active), or only read the text
(passive). As predicted by the ICAP hypothesis, the results
showed that the constructive (diagram) group did better on
both measures of spatial and causal knowledge than the
active (summary) group did, which in turn did better than
the passive reading group.
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK 229
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Pairwise Comparisons Across Two Modes
for Three Engagement Activities
As previously mentioned, we take a different approach to
pairwise comparisons of studies. Instead of comparing two
different activities undertaken in two different modes, as
was done in Chi (2009), we use the ICAP taxonomy to
compare how a speciﬁc activity is implemented, as was
done in Fonseca and Chi (2011). Here we focus on three
activities: note taking, concept mapping, and self-explain-
ing. These three were chosen because students often engage
in them while learning, and many studies have been carried
out testing their effectiveness by manipulating how they are
implemented. We can thus verify whether the levels of
learning outcomes are in the predicted directions according
to the ICAP hypothesis. The studies on the three engage-
ment activities are summarized in Tables 3 to 5 and
described next.
Note taking. In learning from text, taking notes is a
common learning strategy that many students undertake on
their own, even without a teacher’s advice (Kobayashi,
2006). Several other activities are related to taking notes,
such as underlining the most important sentences per para-
graph or highlighting the key sentences using a computer
interface. Taking notes is also somewhat similar to summa-
rizing. In this section, we consider all these related activi-
ties (underlining, highlighting, and summarizing) as
instances of note taking.
Previous studies have revealed a number of ways to
operationalize the engagement activity of taking notes. Stu-
dents may be asked to copy notes verbatim in their entirety,
a passive activity because attention is not focused on some
emphasized parts of the notes. Or students may summarize
a text or lecture in a copy-and-paste way (in which case we
would classify it as active because the copied parts can be
focused on), or take notes in their own words (which is
often constructive because the summary may include con-
clusions and inferences). In addition, recent technological
innovations have supported students in collaborative note
taking (interactive). As expected, the manner in which stu-
dents take notes inﬂuences their learning. For example, a
lab study that can be classiﬁed as passive versus active,
demonstrated that active note taking in which students
underlined the most important sentence in each paragraph
was more effective than simply passively reading the para-
graphs (Rickards & Friedman, 1978; see Peper & Mayer,
1986, for similar results with a video-watching task). In
comparing constructive to passive, Trafton and Trickett
(2001) saw a correlation between constructively taking
notes using an online notepad and improved problem-solv-
ing performance. Namely, students who chose to take notes
did better than those that passively studied the material.
Further evidence supporting the ICAP hypothesis can be
seen in a study that compared constructive to active note
taking. For example, taking free-form notes ( constructive)
is more effective than cutting and pasting short segments of
the target text ( active; Bauer & Koedinger, 2007). Finally,
note taking can also be done interactively. Kam et al.
(2005) developed a collaborating note-taking system that
led students to take better notes compared to students who
took notes alone. Students who worked collaboratively
were more likely to include reﬂections and pose questions
about the material than students who worked alone. How-
ever, the small sample size in their classroom study was
insufﬁcient to observe any signiﬁcant learning differences
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8# Correct
Average Listen (passive)
Average Summarize (ac/g415ve)
Average Explain (construc/g415ve)
0
1
Near Transfer 1 (max = 10)  Transfer 2 (max = 10)  Transfer (max = 3)
Assessment Type
FIGURE 3 Near and far transfer posttest performance by mode of engagement (Coleman, Brown, & Rivkin, 1997).
FIGURE 2 Pretest and posttest performance by mode of engagement
(Menekse, Stump, Krause, & Chi, 2013).
230 CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
between the interactive (collaborative) and constructive
(individual) conditions.
The ICAP hypothesis can also explain results from
studies that show no differenc es between different types
of note-taking styles tha tﬁ tt h es a m eI C A Pc a t e g o r y
(e.g., both conditions are active or both are construc-
tive). Bauer and Koedinger (2007) found no learning
differences between student s who used a computer inter-
face to highlight segments of a text and those who used
copy and paste to select segments of the text to create
notes. This ﬁnding is expected according to the ICAP
hypothesis because both are active activities that
encourage students to physically select but not generate
or integrate the information. Similarly, Peper and Mayer
(1986) found no difference between students who took
notes by summarizing after segments of a lecture and
those who took notes throughout the lecture. Assuming
that they took similar type of copy–paste notes, the
ICAP framework predicts this lack of difference because
both conditions can be considered active.H o w e v e r ,t o
accurately interpret the results, we would need to exam-
ine the product of note taking. This and other limitations
are discussed in Section 3. These studies are shown in
the diagonal cells of Table 3.
TABLE 3
Pairwise Comparisons Between Different Modes of Note Taking
Passive Active Constructive Interactive
Passive No known studies
Active Note taking > No note taking for far
transfer (Peper & Mayer, 1986)
Underlining > Reading (Rickards &
Friedman, 1978)
Highlighting notes D Pasting Notes
(Bauer & Koedinger, 2007)
Summarize after each segment D
Summarize throughout lecture
(Peper & Mayer, 1986)
Constructive Taking notes with notepad > Not
taking notes (Trafton & Trickett,
2001)
Free-form notes > Cutting/Paste
Bauer & Koedinger, 2007)
No known studies
Interactive No known studies No known studies Collaboratively taking notes >
Individually taking notes, in
the quality of the notes, but
no learning difference (Kam
et al., 2005)
No known studies
Note. The light gray shading refers to the diagonal cells with activities implemented in the same mode; the dark gray shading refers to cells with redundant
studies as the non-shaded ones.
TABLE 4
Pairwise Comparisons Between Different Modes of Concept Mapping
Passive Active Constructive Interactive
Passive No known studies
Active Copy map > Read map (Willerman
& Mac Harg, 1991)
No known studies
Constructive Correcting concept map > Reading
text (Chang, Sung, & Chen, 2002)
Concept maps C Lecture > Lecture
only for higher level material and
low PK students (Schmid &
Telaro, 1990)
Concept maps > Study C
Discussion for ESL students
(Chularut & DeBacker, 2004)
Concept maps > Read C Discuss
(Guastello, Beasley, & Sinatra,
2000)
Building a concept map from
generating > Constructing a
map via selection (Yin,
Vanides, Ruiz-Primo,
Ayala, & Shavelson, 2005)
No known studies
Interactive Lecture C Collaboratively creating
concept map > Lecture for
science content assessment
(Czerniak & Haney, 1998)
No known studies Collaboratively building
maps > individually
building (Czerniak &
Haney, 1998; Okebukola &
Jegede, 1998)
Collaborative build concept
map D Collaboratively build
with 2 additional resources
(van Boxtel, van Der Linden
& Kanselaar, 2000)
Note. The light gray shading refers to the diagonal cells with activities implemented in the same mode; the dark gray shading refers to cells with redundant
studies as the non-shaded ones.
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK
231
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
Concept mapping. Concept maps are graphical repre-
sentations of knowledge where concepts are represented as
nodes and are connected through labeled relations. For
example, in a concept map of an ecosystem, two nodes may
be “wolves” and “deer” and may be connected by an arrow
labeled “prey upon.” Creating such maps requires selecting
relevant concepts, arranging them hierarchically, and deter-
mining the relationships between them. They are often used
in classrooms as aids to understanding lectures and texts
(Coffey et al., 2003 ). More than 500 studies have investi-
gated the effectiveness and applications of concept map-
ping (e.g., Novak, 1990; Novak & Gowin, 1984;
O’Donnell, Dansereau, & Hall, 2002 ). Two meta-analyses
(Horton, McConney, Gallo, Woods, Senn, & Hamelin,
1993; Nesbit & Adesope, 2006) have found a positive effect
of concept mapping on knowledge acquisition when com-
pared to other learning activities.
Concept mapping can be imp lemented in a number of
ways. Students can be asked to copy a concept map (an
active way of engaging), which has been shown to be
more effective for learning than reading a concept map
(passive; Willerman & Mac Harg, 1991). Building or
correcting a concept map can both be categorized as a
constructive activity because students must generate a
map based on learning materials or revise a map while
correcting. Several studies have shown that generating
or correcting concept maps is better than a variety of
passive activities such as reading a text (Chang, Sung, &
Chen, 2002), listening to a lecture (Schmid & Telaro,
1990), or whole-class discu ssions (Chularut & DeBacker,
2004; Guastello, Beasley, & Sinatra, 2000; we classify
whole-class discussions as passive because the majority
of students in class discus sions are participating
passively ). In addition, there are studies that compare
constructive to active version of concept mapping. For
example, Yin, Vanides, Ruiz-Primo, Ayala, and Shavel-
son (2005) found that students who were asked to gener-
ate the labels for the links on a concept map
(constructive ) did better in total acc uracy and map struc-
ture complexity than students who were asked to select
the links to complete the concept map ( active).
Likewise, collaboratively building concept maps ( inter-
active) results in better learning than just listening to a lec-
ture without building any maps ( passive; Czerniak &
Haney, 1998). Collaboratively building maps is also better
than individually creating maps, supporting our prediction
that interactive is better than constructive (Czerniak &
Haney, 1998; Okebukola & Jegede, 1988).
There are also studies that show that when concept map-
ping is carried out at the same mode of engagement, the
results show no differences in learning gains. For example,
van Boxtel, van der Linden, and Kanselaar (2000) imple-
mented two versions of interactive concept mapping. In
one condition, after students received class instruction on a
topic, they were asked to collaboratively create a concept
map with no additional resources. In the second condition,
after receiving instruction, they were asked to collabora-
tively create a concept map with two additional textbook
chapters available. The results showed that students learned
signiﬁcantly in both conditions, but, as predicted by the
ICAP hypothesis, there were no differences between condi-
tions. These studies are shown in Table 4.
Self-explaining. Self-explaining is the activity of
explaining an idea or concept aloud to oneself as one learns, or
one can think of it as trying to make sense of the learning
TABLE 5
Pairwise Comparisons Between Different Modes of Self-Explaining (SE)
Passive Active Constructive Interactive
Passive No known studies
Active SE worked example with menu > Study example
only (Conati & Van Lehn, 2000)
No known
studies
Constructive Explaining sentences > Repeating sentences
(O’Reilly et al., 1998)
Rereading with SE > Rereading only (Grifﬁn et al.,
2008)
Prompted SE > Rereading twice (Chi et al., 1994)
Explaining others’ solution > Watching other solution
(Pine & Messer, 2000)
Studying incomplete examples > Studying completed
examples (Atkinson et al., 2003; Stark, 1999)
No known
studies
Explaining own answers D Explaining
other’s answers (Pillow, Mash,
Aloian, & Hill, 2002)
Interactive No known studies No known
studies
Explain other group members
contributions > Self-explain own
contributions in groups (Kramarski &
Dudai, 2009)
Explain with partner > Explain alone
(Hausmann et al., 2008)
No known
studies
Note. The light gray shading refers to the diagonal cells with activities implemented in the same mode; the dark gray shading refers to cells with redundant
studies as the non-shaded ones.
232 CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
materials. Twenty years of research has consistently supported
the ﬁnding that students learn better when they explain to them-
selves the materials they are studying, called the self-explana-
tion effect (Chi, 2000). This is because self-explaining helps
s t u d e n t sc l a r i f ya ni d e ab ye l aborating on it, or inferring new
ideas. The self-explanation effect has been studied across age
groups, domains, and instructional formats, such as reading a
text passage or studying a worked-out example (Bielaczyc,
Pirolli, & Brown, 1995; Chi et al., 1994; Ferguson-Hessler &
de Jong, 1990; Hausmann & Chi, 2002; McEldoon, Durkin, &
Rittle-Johnson, 2013; Renkl, Stark, Gruber, & Mandl, 1998;
Siegler, 1995; Wong, Lawson, & Keeves, 2002).
Self-explaining can be carried out in a conceptual
domain when students read a text passage, or it can be car-
ried out in a procedural domain when students study a
worked-out example. Worked-out examples are problem
statements with line-by-line solution steps; they can be
demonstrated by a teacher on a whiteboard or embedded in
textbooks. In this section, we examine studies that involve
self-explanation using texts, worked-out examples, and
other related contexts.
Self-explaining is most often implemented in a construc-
tive way because students are encouraged to make sense of
the learning materials by generating inferences or by inte-
grating new knowledge with prior knowledge. For concep-
tual domains, many studies have compared self-explaining
implemented in a constructive way with other passive activ-
ities. For example, O’Reilly, Symons, and MacLatchy-Gau-
det (1998) tested college students’ recall and recognition
ability for factual knowledge of the human circulatory sys-
tem when students were asked to either explain what the
sentence means to them (i.e., what new information it pro-
vides, and how it relates to what they already know, stan-
dard self-explaining constructive prompts) or repeat each
sentence on the computer screen until the next fact
appeared (physically repeating is an active condition
because repeating causes more focused attention but does
not generate new knowledge). As predicted, they found that
recall and recognition were signiﬁcantly higher for the self-
explanation group when compared to the repetition group.
Other studies comparing the same two conditions showed
that self-explaining was better than reading the text twice
for both meta-comprehension (Grifﬁn, Wiley, & Thiede,
2008) and learning (Chi et al., 1994).
Self-explaining can also be used in a broader context
than reading from a text. Pine and Messer (2000) for exam-
ple, asked children to “explain” how the instructor was able
to balance a beam (a constructive activity) compared with
asking the children simply to “watch” (without making any
comments) the instructor demonstrate how to balance the
beam (passive). Children in the constructive “explain” con-
dition improved in their ability to balance the beam signiﬁ-
cantly more than children in the passive “watch” condition.
For procedural domains, self-explaining has been tradi-
tionally implemented in a constructive way in the context
of a worked example by having students explain each
example step to themselves, such as justifying how a solu-
tion step follows from a prior step (Chi et al., 1989; Renkl
et al., 1998). Other, more indirect constructive methods
include providing incomplete worked-out examples (Stark,
1999), thus requiring students to infer the omitted steps (a
form of self-explaining), resulting in more transfer than
simply studying completed worked-out examples (a more
passive mode of engagement). Incomplete examples can
also involve fading (taking away) some of the example
steps, especially as the learner gets more proﬁcient at solv-
ing problems (Atkinson, Renkl, & Merrill, 2003). Thus,
fading provides an opportunity for the learner to generate
her own steps (more constructive) and this has been shown
to be more effective than not fading (more passive).
Self-explaining can be implemented as an active activity
by having students choose an explanation or elaboration
among a set of options. An example of an active way of
self-explaining is a computer-based example-studying task
that asks students to select a justiﬁcation for each solution
step from a menu of choices (Conati & VanLehn, 2000).
Such active ways of studying examples have been shown to
be superior to a passive way, in which students simply stud-
ied examples without any prompts to justify or explain by
choosing.
Kramarski and Dudai (2009) compared interactive ver-
sus constructive forms of self-explaining by training ninth-
grade students to generate self-explanations to prompts
such as, “What is my conclusion?” and “Is my explanation
clear?” as they solved math problems in groups of four
(constructive). In the interactive condition, students were
prompted with questions that focused on building on and
responding to the other group members’ contributions, such
as “How can I respond to my friend regarding the correct-
ness of his/her explanation?” and “How can I modify my
friend’s solution and explanation?” The interactive groups
scored signiﬁcantly higher in their mathematical accuracy
and problem transfer scores than the self-explain groups. A
similar study had students studying worked-out examples
in the context of solving physics problems using an intelli-
gent tutoring system. Students either worked alone at the
computer to solve the problems and were prompted to
explain the solution steps presented on the screen (the con-
structive condition) or worked in dyads at the computer to
solve the problems and were prompted to generate joint
explanations to the solution steps (the interactive condi-
tion). The jointly explaining dyads outperformed the solo
solvers on multiple measures: They answered faster, ﬁn-
ished more problems in the allotted time, entered more cor-
rect entries, displayed a lower error rate, requested fewer
hints when solving problems with the ITS, and so on (Haus-
mann, van de Sande, & VanLehn, 2008).
With respect to comparing versions of self-explaining
implemented in the same mode, Pillow, Mash, Aloian, and
Hill (2002) asked 4- to 5-year-old children to predict
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK 233
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
misinterpretation of ambiguous pictures. In one condition,
the children were prompted to explain their own misinter-
pretations (explain-own condition is constructive), and in
the other condition they were asked to explain the misinter-
pretations of a puppet viewing similar pictures (explain-
puppet condition is also constructive). Both conditions are
clearly constructive, and neither condition received feed-
back. As predicted by ICAP, there were no signiﬁcant dif-
ferences between the two groups in their ﬁnal scores on the
posttests. These studies are shown in Table 5. For more
detailed analyses (with effect sizes) and comparisons of
self-explaining implemented in different modes, see Fon-
seca and Chi (2011).
Classroom Studies
There are also many classroom studies whose interventions
can be reinterpreted using the ICAP framework. These
studies are summarized in Table 6, with the cells indicating
the modes involved in the pairwise contrasts. For example,
a classroom study comparing students who took notes using
a partial, scaffolded outline to those who were given a
handout with an almost verbatim transcript of the lecture
showed that students who used the partial outline to take
notes did signiﬁcantly better on both immediate and reten-
tion tests than those who were given the comprehensive
handout (Russell, Caris, Harris, & Hendricson, 1983). This
ﬁnding is predicted by the ICAP hypothesis in that taking
notes with a partial outline is more comparable to an active
task because students must copy additional notes from the
lecture to complete the handout, whereas having a complete
transcript of the lecture requires no copying and reviewing
it is thus passive. Other studies have compared and found
that having students build concept maps ( constructive)
promotes better learning than having students participate in
a whole-class discussion ( passive; Chularut & DeBacker,
2004; Guastello et al., 2000). As mentioned earlier, we
assume that a whole-class discussion is constructive only
for the few students who are involved in the discussion. For
the majority of students who are silently listening to the dis-
cussion, the activity is passive.
A classroom study by Hendricks (2001) found that
discussing cause–effect rela tions with a peer is superior
to observing the teacher iden tify cause–effect relations.
Again, this is consistent with ICAP’s prediction because
discussing cause–effect relations with a peer is an inter-
active activity, whereas watching the teacher identify
cause–effect relations is only passive. Similarly, if stu-
dents are interacting in cooperative groups ( interactive ),
this leads to greater learni ng than listening to a tradi-
tional lecture ( passive; Ebert-May, Brewer, & Allred,
1997).
Two classroom studies have contrasted an interactive
mode with an active mode. One study found that learning
using the jigsaw strategy (in which each student within a
group develops expertise on a subtopic and explains it to
the other students within his or her group, thus being inter-
active) promotes more learning than classrooms where indi-
vidual students gather information for themselves ( active;
Doymus, 2008). Another study found peer tutoring ( inter-
active) to be better than ﬁlling out guided notes ( active;
Mastropieri, Scruggs, Spencer, & Fontana, 2003). Like-
wise, an interactive self-explaining group tends to per-
formed better than a constructive self-explain-only group.
In Kramarski and Dudai’s (2009) study, students who self-
explained and received feedback from each other (thus
interactive) performed better than students who self-
explained but did not receive feedback ( constructive only).
TABLE 6
Pairwise Contrasts of Classroom Studies Involving Comparisons Between a Mix of Passive, Active, Constructive, and Interactive Engagement
Activities
Passive Active Constructive Interactive
Passive
Active Taking scaffolded notes > Comprehensive
handout (Russell et al., 1983)
Constructive Building concept maps > Whole class
discussions (Chularut & DeBacker, 2004;
Guastello, Beasley, & Sinatra, 2000)
Guided prompts C Solve > Solve (Whitten
& Rabinowitz, 2010)
Compare C Contrast C Write C Solve >
Solve (Docktor et al., 2010)
Interactive Cooperative groups > Traditional lecture
(Ebert-May, et al., 1997)
Student–student discussionC small-group
activitiesC feedback> Traditional lecture
(Deslauriers, Schelew, Wieman, 2011)
Discussing cause-effect with peer
> Observing teacher identify cause-effect
relationships (Hendricks, 2001)
Peer tutoring > Filling out guided notes
(Mastropieri et al., 2003)
Jigsaw groups > Individuals gathering
information (Doymus, 2008)
Generating with partner > Selecting with
partner (Zheng & Linn, 2013)
SE C Receive Feedback > Self-
explanation without feedback
(Kramarski & Dudai, 2009)
Note. The light gray shading refers to the diagonal cells with activities implemented in the same mode; the dark gray shading refers to cells with redundant
studies as the non-shaded ones.
234 CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
There are also a number of classroom studies comparing
constructive learning activities with active activities. For
example, two studies compared problem-solving alone
(assuming this tends to be an active activity when solving
in a plug-and-chug way) to solving problems with an added
constructive activity (such as compare and contrast, Dock-
tor, Strand, Mestre, & Ross, 2010; and responding to guided
prompts, Whitten, 2011). The results showed that adding
the constructive activity improves learning.
Classroom studies also tend to include multiple activities
as one intervention. For the purpose here, we classify the
intervention according to the highest activity mode. For
example, in the study by Deslauriers, Schelew, and Wieman
(2011), they compared traditional listening to lecture
(passive) to an intervention consisting of predicting, reason-
ing, solving, critiquing, and peer discussion. We classify
this intervention as an interactive one because it includes
peer-to-peer discussion. As predicted, the intervention pro-
moted more learning than listening to traditional lectures.
Classroom studies also illustrate a key point of the ICAP
framework, namely, simply asking students to work
together does not automatically make an activity interac-
tive. As mentioned in the ﬁrst section, to be interactive, stu-
dents must work together on a constructive task. In a
classroom study, Zhang and Linn (2013) compared the
effects of two conditions on learning chemical reactions. In
the ﬁrst condition, students worked in pairs to draw mole-
cules linking the atoms with lines (drawing is a generative
activity). In the second condition, pairs of students physi-
cally selected static images that represented the correct
molecular structure. Even though both conditions involved
working with a partner, only the generate condition can be
considered interactive according to the subsumptive nature
of the ICAP framework; that is, interactive activities
require partners to be constructive and go beyond the pro-
vided material. Thus, this comparison can be reinterpreted
as comparing interactive to active and, as expected by the
ICAP hypothesis, the interactive (drawing in pairs) condi-
tion showed greater learning gains than the active (select in
pairs) condition.
Summary
This section reviewed studies in the literature to see if their
results validate the predictions of the ICAP hypothesis.
First, we reported results from a study conducted in our lab
that compared all four modes and identiﬁed two studies in
the literature that contained three conditions that can be
reinterpreted using ICAP. Results from all three studies val-
idate our predictions. Second, we showed that ﬁndings from
studies that compared the same engagement activity imple-
mented in different modes also support the ICAP hypothe-
sis; that is, depending on how (or which mode) an activity
is implemented inﬂuenced the learning outcomes. Third,
we validated the prediction of the ICAP hypothesis in
classroom intervention studies. In sum, the empirical evi-
dence from both laboratory and classroom studies provide
support for the ICAP hypothesis.
SECTION 3: CAVEATS, NEW TOOL, AND
COMPARISONS WITH OTHER THEORIES
In this third major section, we consider several caveats and
factors that need to be addressed. We also entertain ways
that ICAP can serve as a tool for (a) explaining discrepant
ﬁndings, (b) determining proper control conditions for
experimental studies, (c) developing rubrics to code learn-
ing data, and (d) guiding instructional design. Finally, we
brieﬂy compare ICAP with other learning theories.
Factors and Considerations That May Override
the ICAP Hypothesis
The ICAP taxonomy of a learner’s overt behaviors is a
gross ﬁrst cut at predicting learning outcomes as a function
of what students are asked to do. However, our analyses
and predictions are based on only one aspect of a learning
situation, the aspect of what students do to engage with the
materials. Clearly there are alternative factors that inﬂuence
how well students learn. In this section, we consider three
factors that can override the predictions of the ICAP
hypothesis.
Assessment measures. An important factor that
may lead to unexpected results according to the ICAP
hypothesis is the type of measures used to assess learning.
In general, performance on shallow or easy assessment
questions typically is not sensitive to various intervention
efforts, and this is true for ICAP activities as well. This is
because shallow questions that require only recall of infor-
mation can be answered with passive receiving type of
activities. For example, Aleven and Koedinger (2002) com-
pared students who were prompted to explain in addition to
solving geometry problems to those who solved the same
problems without prompts to explain. They found no
advantage for explanation on easy-to-guess items but sig-
niﬁcant beneﬁts of explanation for hard-to-guess and trans-
fer problems. Similarly, for the study (shown in Figure 2)
in which we manipulated all four conditions within the
same study (Menekse et al., 2013), we found that perfor-
mance on easy multiple-choice questions was the same for
all levels of engagement activities, but condition differen-
ces emerged on more challenging assessment items.
Thus, when the learning results are nonsigniﬁcant, one
problem may be that the assessment measures are too shal-
low; thus, they are not sensitive enough to detect differen-
ces in learning outcomes as a function of the level of
student engagement.
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK 235
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Domain. A second factor that can lead to violations of
the ICAP hypothesis is the topic domain. Although rare,
not all topics or skills necessarily show increased learning
beneﬁts with increased cognitive engagement. We next pro-
vide two examples and an explanation for why this might
be the case.
One type of topic for which increased cognitive engage-
ment may not be helpful is simple procedural domains for
which the rules are arbitrary and cannot be logically
deduced. For example, the English article system (teaching
students when to use a, an, the, or no article) is governed
by a complicated set of human-made rules and exceptions
exist. In a computer-based tutoring system developed to
teach students how to select the correct article, students
were asked to select either the correct article or the article
and the rule (explanation) for why that article was correct
(e.g., “The noun is made deﬁnite by a prepositional
phrase”). There were no learning differences between the
two conditions (Wylie, 2011).
There are two ways to interpret this result. The simple
one is that both are active selection tasks, so one would not
expect a learning difference. A second interpretation is also
possible, if we assume that selecting an explanation is
closer to being constructive than selecting the answer alone,
thus making the result counterintuitive. This second inter-
pretation suggests that self-explaining article usage may
not be a useful way to learn about the appropriate article to
use because there is no way to rationalize or work through
the reasons for when a particular article is used. In contrast,
in the many examples of effective self-explanation dis-
cussed earlier, it makes sense to ask a why or a how ques-
tion, because presumably with more elaborations and
inferences, one can generate a reason. The same may be
true for topics that are so challenging that students cannot
bootstrap themselves by self-explaining into deeper or
more correct understand because they lack the relevant
schema to interpret the new information correctly. One
such example in the science domain is the concept of
emergence, because emergence is a novel idea that many
students do not have relevant or related knowledge to
understand. Therefore, constructive activities, such as
answering prompted questions, are able to help students
learn only the basic detailed information about the microle-
vel behavior of the molecules and not the interlevel causal
relationships of how behavi ors of the molecules at the
microlevel collectively explain the behavior at the
macrolevel pattern (Chi, Roscoe, Slotta, Roy & Chase,
2012). This is because this coll ective interlevel relation-
ship is an emergent one, which is foreign to students
who are used to sequential causal chain relationships.
Thus, for domains or topic s in which students cannot
bootstrap themselves into d eeper understanding due to a
lack of relevant schemas, or for topics for which no
deeper rationales exist, the predictions made by ICAP
may not hold.
Task differences within a mode. The four engage-
ment modes are based on a student’s overt behavior. Typi-
cally the activities within each mode are distinct, so that
pairwise comparisons of two modes usually compare two
different activities (as was done in Chi, 2009) or the same
activity implemented in two different ways (resulting in dif-
ferent modes), as shown in Tables 3, 4, and 5. In our analy-
ses of the studies in Tables 3 to 5, we have shown that the
same task, implemented with variations that do not change
its mode, produces equivalent learning outcomes.
Although it is often the case that when two activities fall
within a single cell (i.e., use the same mode of engage-
ment), nonsigniﬁcant learning differences are obtained;
however, ICAP cannot always make accurate predictions
about learning outcomes from undertaking two different
engagement activities that can be classiﬁed into the same
mode. This is because a number of factors can affect the
complexity of different tasks or activities within a mode
(e.g., the goal or knowledge to-be-learned of a task, the
time it takes to carry out the task, the procedure or process
by which a task is carried out, etc.). We illustrate next with
an example.
The task of interacting with a peer to invent and the task
of comparing and contrasting two cases while working in
pairs are both interactive activities because they require stu-
dents to produce new knowledge: either inventing a rule or
method in the invent case or come up with similarities and
differences in the compare-and-contrast case. These two
conditions were manipulated by Chi, Dohmen, Shemwell,
Chase, and Schwartz (2012) when they asked sixth-grade
students to learn about horizontal projectile motion. In the
invent condition, students were asked to work in pairs to
invent a single method to ﬁgure out where to put the ﬁnal
destination as a result of a set of projectile trajectories that
were shot at different speeds and from different heights. In
the compare–contrast condition, students were asked to
work in pairs to compare and contrast sets of the same pro-
jectile trajectories. Students in the invent condition showed
greater learning gains compared to students in the com-
pare–contrast condition, even though both conditions are
interactive.
A ﬁner grained analysis of the task, however, suggests
why the two interactive activities result in different learning
gains. An analysis of the worksheets shows that the two
engagement activities cause different ways of processing
the cases. In the compare–contrast condition, students paid
attention to single factor or feature (e.g., speed, height,
etc.). This is revealed in comments such as, They go in dif-
ferent speeds or They start at different heights. As coded by
the authors, a double feature comment would involve two
features, such as more speed D further distance, and a triple
statement would relate three features. The worksheet analy-
ses showed that only 10% of the compare–contrast group
produced triple-feature statements, whereas 100% of the
invent group did. Conversely, the compare–contrast group
236
CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
produced on average 3.0 single-feature statements, whereas
the invention groups produced no single-feature statements.
In short, the activity of making comparisons across two
cases biased the students to compare features individually,
whereas the invent activity encouraged students to make
more holistic statements and connect features with each
other, which is necessary in order to invent the correct
method.
This study demonstrates that although both learning
activities are interactive, their differing task structures
biased the way students performed them, resulting in differ-
ent qualitative ways of learning, which leads to different
amounts of learning. Notice, however, that the ICAP
hypothesis focuses its predictions across modalities, which
may not be violated in this case, in that both inventing and
comparing and contrasting (both interactive) should pro-
duce greater learning outcomes than an active or passive
activity.
In summary, it is possible that different levels of learn-
ing outcomes are achieved for activities within the same
mode of engagement. One explanation is that some activi-
ties are more cognitively demanding than other activities,
even if they both belong to the same mode. This is because
overt behavior is a gross analysis of engagement behavior
and not a cognitive analysis of a given task activity. How-
ever, even so, the prediction may still hold across modes of
activities.
ICAP Can Further Serve as a Tool to Explain, Dictate,
Evaluate, and Design
In this section, we describe the contribution of the ICAP
framework and hypothesis as a tool for both research pur-
poses and instructional design.
Using ICAP to explain discrepant ﬁndings about
learning activities. In a preceding section of this article,
we stated that one way of validating the ICAP hypothesis
was to examine studies using three speciﬁc learning activi-
ties (note taking, concept mapping, and self-explaining)
when each activity was implemented according to different
modes of engagement. Under its lens, we can provide an
interpretation for seemingly discrepant ﬁndings. By dis-
crepant ﬁndings, we mean that for a given learning activity,
such as note taking, some research suggests that it is helpful
for learning, whereas others report that it is not. To illus-
trate, consider the following two studies. In one study (Mas-
tropieri et al., 2001), the results showed that note taking by
answering who–what questions was beneﬁcial, whereas
Coleman et al. (1997) concluded that note taking by sum-
marizing was not as beneﬁcial. Using the ICAP framework,
we can resolve these discrepant ﬁndings by ﬁrst categoriz-
ing the learning activity and then comparing it to the
alternative condition used in each study for comparison. In
the Mastropieri et al. publication, answering who–what
questions is a constructive way of summarizing, and they
compared that condition to a passive task of reading out
loud. Thus, it is not surprising that learning is better in the
constructive summarizing case (Mastropieri et al., 2001).
On the other hand, Coleman et al. compared summarizing
by selecting only the most important sentences, an active
task, to summarizing by explaining, which is a constructive
task. Therefore, it is not surprising that summarizing
through selection ( active) is worse for learning than sum-
marizing through explanation ( constructive; Coleman et al.,
1997). Thus, an activity such as summarizing cannot be
claimed as beneﬁcial in an absolute way; its utility for
learning depends on how it is implemented and to what
appears activity it is compared. In short, what appears to be
discrepant results in the literature is completely systematic
from ICAP’s point of view.
As the preceding sections show, in scrutinizing such
studies, it is apparent that whether note taking is an effec-
tive learning activity depends on three factors: (a) how it is
implemented, that is, what are the instructions/directions
given to the student, thus making it an active, constructive ,
or interactive activity; (b) what the alternative (or often the
control) condition it is contrasted with (i.e., if it was imple-
mented as a constructive activity, then was it compared
with another passive, active, or constructive activity); and
(c) how students actually carried out the activity. In short,
ICAP can highlight the systematicity that underlies appar-
ent contradictions between studies.
Using ICAP to dictate the choice of a control condi-
tion in research design. Besides explaining discrepant
results in the literature, ICAP can also be used as a tool for
determining areas that are understudied and, most impor-
tantly, for deciding control conditions. As Tables 3 to 5
show, the majority of the studies on interventions compared
a constructive mode with a passive mode. Far fewer studies
have compared the constructive mode with active, interac-
tive, or other constructive modes.
With respect to choosing meaningful control conditions,
the most stringent comparison of an intervention is to com-
pare it with another intervention that employs an engagement
activity of the same mode. For example, to claim that insert-
ing a metacognitive prompt is a useful intervention (Beal &
Stevens, 2010), one needs to compare it with another type of
prompt that also elicits generative responses so that both
activities are constructive, rather than comparing it with
reading academic advice that does not elicit a response. Only
by comparing two interventions that ﬁt in the same mode of
engagement can one draw legitimate conclusions about the
effectiveness of a speciﬁc type of intervention.
That is, suppose one ﬁnds that Intervention A is better
than Intervention B. Before claiming that it is the speciﬁc
processes behind Intervention A that caused the learning
gains, it is important to examine the engagement mode of
the two interventions. For example, if Intervention A is
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK 237
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
constructive and Intervention B is active than the learning
beneﬁts may not be due to the speciﬁc nature of Interven-
tion A but may only lead to a more general conclusion that
Intervention A is more cognitively engaging than Interven-
tion B.
Using ICAP to evaluate students’ outputs. So far,
we have discussed only the mode of an activity, as intended
by the designer of the activity, such as a teacher. For exam-
ple, if a teacher asks students to draw concept maps, then
presumably this is a constructive task. However, in many
cases, this output (the concept maps) needs to be evaluated
to determine whether in fact the students treated it as a con-
structive task. This is the distinction mentioned earlier
between intended versus enacted. For example, suppose in
such an activity, the teacher populated or provided a set of
six concepts as starting concepts to be used as “nodes” in
the concept map. Upon evaluating or coding of the
students’ maps, it becomes apparent that some students cre-
ated concept maps that only contained the six concepts that
were provided, whereas other students created maps that
had many other concept nodes. This suggests that the stu-
dents who used only the six provided nodes did not create
any new outputs beyond what was provided (thus they were
only active), whereas the other students who produced addi-
tional concept nodes were more constructive. Thus, the
ICAP framework can be used to design a rubric to code and
evaluate students’ outputs. And often an accurate classiﬁca-
tion of an activity’s mode can only be done after such
evaluations.
Using ICAP as a guide for instructional design. In
addition to the research contributions, the ICAP framework
has strong practical implications as teachers and other
instructional designers can use it to choose, modify, or
design tasks for students to perform. Thus, even though
engagement behaviors are strictly deﬁned from the
learners’ perspective, clearly students can be encouraged to
engage in certain ways through the careful design of learn-
ing activities.
In the current depictions in the literature, even though
“active learning” (along with the related concept
“constructive learning”; Cobb, 1994; Jonassen, 1991;
Pelech, 2010; Wilson, 1997) may be ambiguous, “active
learning” does have instructional implications. It suggests
that teachers can “encourage the learner to engage in mak-
ing sense of the material” (Mayer, 2008, p. 17). But are
there concrete methods recommended for teachers to adopt
and adapt? King (1993) explicitly offered 12 getting
involved and really thinking about it activities for “active
learning” (e.g., posing problems, thinking analogically,
developing critiques, etc.). However, these 12 examples do
not specify what qualiﬁes exactly as an “active learning”
activity. And if a teacher chooses not to use one of the 12
examples, how would she know what alternative activity
constitutes an “active learning” activity? Moreover, how do
teachers decide which activity is relatively better for foster-
ing student learning? For example, is think-pair-share better
than developing critiques? Finally, research provides few
guidelines for teachers to tell them how to modify their cur-
rent homework and seatwork assignments to encourage stu-
dents to learn more effectively by being active.
Our framework, on the other hand, can provide speciﬁc
guidelines for how to create lessons that incorporate overt
behaviors that are associated with higher levels of engage-
ment and their associated knowledge-change processes. We
have evaluated whether the ICAP framework and ICAP
hypothesis are beneﬁcial for professional development by
conducting several small-scale training workshops in which
we introduced teachers to the framework and evaluated
whether they could successfully use the framework when
designing lessons. Initial results are promising and show
that teachers are able to both understand the framework and
correctly apply it when designing new lessons.
We have also developed an online module containing
information about ICAP. Speciﬁcally, the module can scaf-
fold teachers during the design process and encourage them
to consider not only the speciﬁc task but how to design bet-
ter assessments that measure deep knowledge as well. For
example, a teacher who normally delivers instruction via a
passive mode such as lecturing will learn from the module
to provide students with a guided notes worksheet thus cre-
ating an active activity, or the teacher may learn to create a
constructive activity by prompting students to build a con-
cept map during the lecture. Similarly, a teacher who previ-
ously considered an interactive activity to be any task a
student did not complete alone could learn from the module
to ensure that interactive activities not only involve work-
ing in groups but also require students to be constructive or
generative while completing the tasks.
With the explosion of computer-based instruction, this
same set of challenges of how to design student activities also
confronts designers of computer-based learning environ-
ments. Because some forms of activities (such as selecting an
answer from a menu of choices) are easier to implement in a
computer-based learning environment than others (such as
generating a free-form response that needs to be veriﬁed),
designers of learning environments also need clear-cut rec-
ommendations about the trade-offs between the cost of imple-
mentation and effectiveness of students’ activities for
learning. In this article, even though we focus primarily on
teachers’ practices, our work has direct implications for
designers of all learning environments.
Comparison With Other Theories
To summarize, the ICAP framework consists of four modes
of overt engagement activities, passive, active, construc-
tive, and interactive, the associated knowledge-change pro-
cesses for each mode, the associated resulting changes in
238
CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
knowledge, with the concomitant improvement in learning
as a function of the knowledge changes and cognitive out-
comes. In other words, the ICAP framework lays out a pos-
sible causal chain, leading from engagement activities to
the knowledge-change processes underlying the engage-
ment activities, resulting in changes in knowledge itself
and the use of that changed knowledge. We further clariﬁed
the ICAP hypothesis and described the circumstances under
which it can be violated. In addition, we showed how it can
explain discrepant ﬁndings, help determine appropriate
control conditions, and improve teachers’ design of learn-
ing activities.
In general, ICAP is a theory of cognitive engagement
with a behavioral metric. However, two caveats must be
stated. First, the knowledge-change processes associated
with each mode of engagement are hypothetical. We have
not carried out studies to verify that these knowledge-change
processes are in fact taking place when students engage in
one mode over another. The second caveat is that there may
be other theoretical interpretations of ICAP, viewing cogni-
tion that relies much less on representations and memory.
However, we cannot derive an ICAP hypothesis from such
an alternative view, other than the behavioral view, based on
the hierarchical nature of the overt activities of each mode.
Thus, we welcome any theoretical lens that can derive the
ICAP hypothesis. In this ﬁnal section, we highlight how
ICAP differs from existing learning theories (constructivism,
cognitive load theory, and Bloom’s revised taxonomy), in
terms of its theoretical stance and interpretation.
Constructivism. Constructivism is a broad framework
that assumes that the responsibility of learning should
reside increasingly with the learner (Von Glasersfeld,
1989). Moreover, constructivism emphasizes the impor-
tance of the learner being actively involved in the learning
process, unlike previous educational viewpoints where the
responsibility rested with the instructor to teach and where
the learner played a passive, receptive role. Thus ICAP is
very similar to constructivism in this sense of focusing
more on the actions of the learner than the instructor. Con-
structivism translates to instruction by encouraging a vari-
ety of learner-controlled or learner-centered activities such
as discovery, hands-on, experiential, collaborative, project-
based, and task-based learning. These activities have ana-
logs in the active, constructive, and interactive modes of
learning. So the basic difference between constructivism
and the ICAP framework is that ICAP differentiates in a
more concrete and ﬁne-grained way (both in terms of the
behaviors and in terms of the learning outcomes) the activi-
ties that constructivism has promoted. Furthermore, per-
haps constructivism is misinterpreted, but the notion of
“constructing an understanding,” let’s say of the sentence
“The heart has a double loop in circulation,” is interpreted
in ICAP as the way (if doing it constructively) to integrate
that sentence with one’s prior knowledge, making
additional inferences, and so on, in order to understand
what having a double loop in circulation might mean. Con-
structing in ICAP does not mean that the learner discovers
the fact that “The heart has a double loop in circulation.”
Constructing in ICAP is a means to achieve or learn with
understanding.
Cognitive load theory. In cognitive psychology, cog-
nitive load refers to the load imposed on working memory
from an information-processing framework. Because
humans have a limited working memory capacity, the
amount of information that can be processed concurrently
during complex learning activities can overload the ﬁnite
amount of working memory capacity. Cognitive load the-
ory provides explicit empirically based guidelines for the
best ways to design instructional materials, with the goal
of decreasing extraneous cognitive load during learning.
For example, cognitive load theory suggests integrating
diagrams and text information rather than presenting them
separately (i.e., split attention effect). In general, cognitive
load theory suggests that instruction should be designed to
focus the learner’s attention toward the germane materials
(Sweller, 1994).
The obvious difference between cognitive load theory
and the ICAP framework is that ICAP is concerned with
eliciting higher modes of activities from learners, instead of
changing and reducing the load imposed by an activity. So
the difference is one of focusing on the learners’ activities
versus the load of instructional activities. Moreover,
ICAP’s predictions seem to be the opposite of predictions
from the load theory. For example, cognitive load theory
states that the greater the load in the to-be-processed pre-
sented materials, the more difﬁcult a task becomes, and
therefore the less resulting learning. However, ICAP makes
the opposite prediction. That is, as the mode of engagement
goes from passive to interactive, the activity becomes more
effortful (i.e., imposes more load). Although we can infer
that this is true by the hypothetical knowledge-change pro-
cesses involved, direct evidence can be gathered from ask-
ing students in a self-report. McEldoon (2014) asked
students to rate their perceived cognitive load (or working
memory demand) after completing a worked example that
included instructional explanations of calculating an analy-
sis of variance. One condition completed it actively by
determining ﬁnal values within the worked example and
copying or paraphrasing instructional explanations. The
other condition completed the worked example construc-
tively by generating intermediate values and generating
self-explanations prior to receiving instructional explana-
tions. She found that students in the constructive condition
reported signiﬁcantly higher levels of cognitive load or
working memory demand than those in the active condi-
tion. For one of the lessons, the constructive condition
also had signiﬁcantly higher learning gains. Thus, with
respect to cognitive engagement, ICAP may make the
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK 239
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
opposite prediction from cognitive load theory, in that the
more load or effort is used to process learning materials,
the more learning is achieved. However, at times ICAP
and cognitive load theory predict congruent results;
namely, if increased engagement corresponds to increased
germane cognitive load (e.g., when students are asked to
generate self-explanations, they are being constructive,
according to ICAP, and by explaining they are also
increasing germane load).
Bloom’ s taxonomy. It is a daunting task to compare
and contrast Bloom’s taxonomy with ICAP. We are basing
our comparison with Bloom’s taxonomy as described in the
2001 revised version (Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001). The
goal of Bloom’s taxonomy is to ﬁrst classify learning objec-
tives and then to design instructional activities and assess-
ment that align with the objectives. A teacher’s learning
objectives must ﬁrst be classiﬁed into one of six categories
of cognitive processes: remember, understand, apply, ana-
lyze, evaluate, and create. Suppose an instructional objec-
tive is to “differentiate between rational numbers and
irrational numbers.” “Differentiate” or “distinguish
between” are assumed to require the cognitive processes of
analyze, according to Anderson and Krathwohl (2001),
because analyze “involves breaking material into its con-
stituent parts and determining how the parts are related to
one another and to an overall structure” (p. 79). Once
teachers have classiﬁed the learning objective as analyze,
they must design instruction that requires students to ana-
lyze, such as use examples and non-examples to help stu-
dents form the proper categories of rational and irrational
numbers. In addition, assessment items must be designed to
align with the objective of analyze, such as designing a test
question that asks students to classify each number on a list
of real numbers as either a rational or an irrational number.
The major characteristic difference between Bloom’s
taxonomy and the ICAP taxonomy is that Bloom’s taxon-
omy focuses its users on their instructional goals and how
to measure whether the goal has been achieved, whereas
ICAP focuses its users on the means for achieving the
instructional goals. Because one framework focuses on
ends and the other on means, the two frameworks are com-
plementary. Minor differences also exist. First, ICAP is
more parsimonious in that the framework applies to learn-
ing of various forms of knowledge, whether it is factual,
conceptual, or procedural; and the categories of learner
engagement activities can be easily distinguished by com-
paring information generated by the learner(s) vis- /C18a-vis the
information provided by the learning environment. Second,
Bloom’s cognitive processes refer to the processes
involved in carrying out the assessment task, such as the
task of analyzing that requires decomposing into constitu-
ent units, similar to various task-speciﬁc cognitive pro-
cesses underlying other problem-solving tasks and
activities mentioned in this article. ICAP’s cognitive
processes, however, refer to the processes of learning or
what is referred to here as knowledge-change processes.
Third, ICAP proposes that co-construction through interac-
tion can achieve the greatest learning outcomes, whereas
Bloom’s taxonomy does not distinguish between intraper-
sonal and interpersonal cognition and, hence, his learning
outcomes can be achieved at all levels without interaction
with others.
CONCLUSION
The ICAP framework and hypothesis provide speciﬁc,
operationalized deﬁnitions of engagement activities that
can easily be applied to a number of learning environments.
The ICAP hypothesis predicts that as activities move from
passive to active to constructive to interactive, students
undergo different knowledge-change processes and, as a
result, learning will increase. This hypothesis has been vali-
dated through a number of classroom and laboratory stud-
ies, and in this article, we examined its validity in three
speciﬁc tasks: note taking, self-explaining, and creating
concept maps. In addition, we use the framework to clarify
discrepant ﬁndings in the literature, propose a number of
useful applications of the framework, and compare and con-
trast ICAP to existing cognitive and learning theories.
Essentially, ICAP is a hypothesis about the relative level of
learning associated with each of these four modes of stu-
dent engagement, with the advantage being that it can
detect regularity across a large corpus of data in the litera-
ture and can be used to inform both classroom and labora-
tory studies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Comments and edits from the reviewers and Clark Chinn
are greatly appreciated. Special thanks also go to Bryan
Henderson, Katherine McEldoon, Glenda Stump, and Kurt
VanLehn for their comments.
FUNDING
The authors are grateful for support from the Institute of
Education Sciences (Award #R305A110090) for the project
Developing Guidelines for Optimizing Levels of Students’
Overt Engagement Activities.
REFERENCES
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. (2002). An effective metacognitive strategy:
Learning by doing and explaining with a computer-based cognitive
tutor. Cognitive Science, 26, 147–179.
240 CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Alibali, M., & DiRusso, A. (1999). The function of gesture in learning to
count: More than keeping track. Cognitive Development, 14, 37–56.
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (2005). A taxonomy for learning,
teaching, and assessing. London, England: Longman.
Atkinson, R. K., Renkl, A., & Merrill, M. M. (2003). Transitioning from
studying examples to solving problems: Effects of self-explanation
prompts and fading worked-out steps. Journal of Educational Psychol-
ogy, 95, 774–783.
Azevedo, R., Greene, J. A., Moos, D. C., Winters, F. I., Cromley, J. G., &
Godbole-Chaudhuri, P. (2006). Is externally-regulated learning by a
human tutor always effective in facilitating learning with hypermedia?
In S. Barab, K. Hay, & D. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Sciences (pp. 16–22). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. Journal of the Learning Scien-
ces, 12, 307–359.
Bartlett, F. C. (1958). Thinking: An experimental and social study . London,
England: Allen & Unwin.
Bauer, A., & Koedinger, K. R. (2007). Selection-based note-taking appli-
cations. CHI 07 Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems. New York, NY: ACM.
B e a l ,C .R . ,&S t e v e n s ,R .H .( 2 0 10). Improving students’ problem
solving in a web-based chemistry simulation through embedded
metacognitive messages. Technology, Instruction, Cognition &
Learning, 8, 255–271.
Bielaczyc, K., Pirolli, P. L., & Brown, A. L. (1995). Training in self-expla-
nation and self-regulation strategies: Investigating the effects of knowl-
edge acquisition activities on problem solving. Cognition and
Instruction, 13, 221–252.
Biswas, G., Leelawong, K., Schwartz, D., & Vye, N. (2005). Learning by
teaching a new agent paradigm for education software. Applied Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 19, 363–392.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Kempler, T. M., & Krajcik, J. S. (2004). Motivation and
cognitive engagement in learning environments. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.),
The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 475–488). New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Bodemer, D., Ploetzner, R., Feuerlein, I., & Spada, H. (2004). The active
integration of information during learning with dynamic and interactive
visualisations. Learning and Instruction, 14, 325–341.
Bonwell, C. C., & Eison, J. A. (1991). Active learning: Creating excite-
ment in the classroom . Washington, DC: School of Education and
Human Development, George Washington University.
Bonwell, C. C., & Sutherland, T. E. (1996). The active learning continuum:
Choosing activities to engage students in the classroom. New Directions
for Teaching and Learning, 1996(67), 3–16.
Brown, A. L., & Palincsar, A. S. (1989). Guided, cooperative learning and
individual knowledge acquisition. In L. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learn-
ing, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 393–451).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bruner, J. S. (1961). The act of discovery. Harvard Educational Review ,
31, 21–32.
Butcher, K. R. (2006). Learning from text with diagrams: Promoting men-
tal model development and inference generation. Journal of Educational
Psychology
, 98, 182–197.
Chang, K.-E., Sung, Y.-T., & Chen, I.-D. (2002). The effect of concept
mapping to enhance text comprehension and summarization. The Jour-
nal of Experimental Education, 71, 5–23.
Chi, M., Dohmen, I., Shemwell, J. T., Chase, C. C., & Schwartz, D. L.
(2012, April). Seeing the forest from the trees: A comparison of two
instructional models using contrasting cases . Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Chi, M. T. H. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The dual processes
of generating inferences and repairing mental models. Advances in
Instructional Psychology, 5, 161–238.
Chi, M. T. H. (2009). Active-Constructive-Interactive: A conceptual
framework for differentiating learning activities. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1, 73–105.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R.
(1989). Self–explanations: How students study and use examples in
learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145–182.
Chi, M. T. H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. H. & Lavancher, C. (1994). Elicit-
ing self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive Science , 18,
439–477.
Chi, M. T. H., & Kang, S. (2014). The learning beneﬁts of dialogue videos
over monologue videos: Implications for designing online videos . Manu-
script submitted for publication.
Chi, M. T. H., & Menekse, M. (in press). Dialogues as interactions. In
C. Asterhan & L. Resnick (Eds.), Socializing intelligence through
academic talk and dialogue. Washington, DC: AERA.
Chi, M. T. H., Roscoe, R. D., Slotta, J. D., Roy, M., & Chase, C. C. (2012).
Misconceived causal explanations for emergent processes. Cognitive
Science, 36, 1–61.
Chi, M. T. H., Roy, M., & Hausmann, R. G. M. (2008). Observing tutorial
dialogues collaboratively: Insights about human tutoring effectiveness
from vicarious learning. Cognitive Science, 32, 301–341.
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S. A., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & Hausmann, R. G.
(2001). Learning from human tutoring. Cognitive Science, 25, 471–533.
Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic
inquiry in schools: A theoretical framework for evaluating inquiry tasks.
Science Education, 86, 175–218.
Chularut, P., & DeBacker, T. K. (2004). The inﬂuence of concept mapping
on achievement, self-regulation, and selfefﬁcacy in students of English
as a second language. Contemporary Educational Psychology , 29,
248–263.
Cobb, P. (Ed.). (1994). Learning mathematics: Constructivist and interac-
tionist theories of mathematical development . Dordrecht, The Nether-
lands: Kluwer Academic.
Coffey, J. W., Carnot, M. J., Feltovich, P. J., Feltovich, J., Hoffman, R. R.,
&C a~nas, A. J. (2003). A summary of literature pertaining to the use of
concept mapping techniques and technologies for education and perfor-
mance support (Tech. rep. submitted to the US Navy Chief of Naval
Education and Training). Pensacola, FL: Institute for Human and
Machine Cognition.
Coleman, E. B., Brown, A. L., & Rivkin, I. D. (1997). The effect of
instructional explanations on learning from scientiﬁc texts. Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 6, 347–365.
Conati, C., & Carenini, G. (2001). Knowledge encapsulation: Studies on
the development of medical expertise. In 17th International Joint Con-
ference on artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 1301–1306). San Francisco, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Conati, C., & VanLehn, K. (2000). Toward computer-based support of
meta-cognitive skills: A computational framework to coach self-expla-
nation. International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education , 11,
389–415.
Corno, L., & Mandinach, E. (1983). The role of cognitive engagement in
classroom learning and motivation.Educational Psychologist, 18, 88–108.
Czerniak, C. M., & Haney, J. J. (1998). The effect of collaborative concept
mapping on elementary preservice teachers’ anxiety, efﬁcacy, and
achievement in physical science. Journal of Science Teacher Education ,
9, 303–320.
Damon, W. (1984). Peer education: The untapped potential. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 5, 331–343.
Dawson, I. (2004). Time for chronology? Ideas for developing chronologi-
cal understanding. Teaching History, 117, 14–24.
Deslauriers, L., Schelew, E., & Wieman, C. (2011). Improved learning in a
large-enrollment physics class. Science, 332, 862–864.
D’Mello, S., Olney, A., Williams, C., & Hays, P. (2012). Gaze tutor: A
gaze-reactive intelligent tutoring system. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 70, 377–398.
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK
241
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
Docktor, J. L., Strand, N. E., Mestre, J. P., & Ross, B. H. (2010, October).
A conceptual approach to physics problem solving. In AIP Conference
Proceedings (Vol. 1289, p. 137). Portland, OR: American Institute of
Physics.
Doymus, K. (2008). Teaching chemical equilibrium with the jigsaw tech-
nique. Research in Science Education , 38, 249–260.
Ebert-May, D., Brewer, C., & Allred, S. (1997). Innovation in large lec-
tures: Teaching for active learning. Bioscience, 47, 601–607.
Ferguson-Hessler, M., & de Jong, T. (1990). Studying physics texts: Dif-
ferences in study processes between good and poor performers. Cogni-
tion and Instruction, 7, 41–54.
Fink, L. D. (2013). Creating signiﬁcant learning experiences: An inte-
grated approach to designing college courses . New York, NY: Wiley &
Sons.
Fonseca, B. & Chi, M. T. H. (2011). The self-explanation effect: A con-
structive learning activity. In R. E. Mayer & P. A. Alexander (Eds.), The
handbook of research on learning and instruction (pp. 296–321). New
York, NY: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Fredricks, J. A., Blumenfeld, P. C., & Paris, A. H. (2004). School engage-
ment: Potential of the concept, state of the evidence. Review of Educa-
tional Research, 74, 59–109.
Gobert, J. D., & Clement, J. J. (1999). Effects of student-generated dia-
grams versus student-generated summaries on conceptual understanding
of causal and dynamic knowledge in plate tectonics. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 36, 39–53.
Goldstone, R. L., & Day, S. (Eds.) (2012). New conceptualizations of
transfer of learning [Special issue]. Educational Psychologist, 47(3).
Graesser, A. C., & Person, N. K. (1994). Question asking during tutoring.
American Educational Research Journal, 31, 104–137.
Grifﬁn, T. D., Wiley, J., & Thiede, K. W. (2008). Individual differences,
rereading, and self-explanation: Concurrent processing and cue validity
as constraints on metacomprehension accuracy. Memory & Cognition ,
36, 93–103.
Guastello, E. F., Beasley, T. M., & Sinatra, R. C. (2000). Concept mapping
effects on science content comprehension of low-achieving inner-city
seventh graders. Remedial and Special Education, 21, 356–364.
Hausmann, R. G. M., & Chi, M. T. H. (2002). Can a computer interface
support self-explaining? Cognitive Technology, 7, 4–14.
Hausmann, R. G. M., van de Sande, B., & VanLehn, K. (2008). Shall we
explain? Augmenting learning from intelligent tutoring systems and
peer collaboration. In B. P. Woolf, E. Aimeur, R. Nkambou, & S. Lajoie
(Eds.), Intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 636–645). Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: IOS.
Hendricks, C. C. (2001). Teaching causal reasoning through cognitive
apprenticeship: What are results from situated learning? Journal of Edu-
cational Research, 94, 302–311.
Hogan, K., Nastasi, B. K., & Pressley, M. (1999). Discourse patterns and
collaborative scientiﬁc reasoning in peer and teacher-guided discussions.
Cognition and Instruction, 17, 379–432.
Horton, P. B., McConney, A. A., Gallo, M., Woods, A. L., Senn, G. J., &
Hamelin, D. (1993). An investigation of the effectiveness of concept
mapping as an instructional tool. Science Education, 77, 95–111.
James, K. H., Humphrey, G. K., Vilis, T., Corrie, B., Baddour, R., & Good-
ale, M. A. (2002). “Active” and “passive” learning of three-dimensional
object structure within an immersive virtual reality environment. Behav-
ior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers , 34, 383–390.
Jonassen, D. H. (1991). Evaluating constructivistic learning. Educational
Technology, 31, 28–33.
Kafai, Y. B. (2006). Playing and making games. Games and Culture , 1,
36–40.
Kam, M., Wang, J., Iles, A., Tse, E., Chiu, J., Glaser, D., ... , Canny, J.
(2005, April). Livenotes: A system for cooperative and augmented note-
taking in lectures. In Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems (CHI ’05) (pp. 531–540). Portland, OR.
Kastens, K. A., & Liben, L. S. (2007). Eliciting self-explanations improves
children’s performance on a ﬁeld-based map skills task. Cognition and
Instruction, 25, 45–74.
Katayama, A. D., Shambaugh, R. N., & Doctor, T. (2005). Promoting
knowledge transfer with electronic note taking. Teaching of Psychology,
32, 129–131.
King, A. (1993). From sage on the stage to guide on the side. College
Teaching, 41, 30–35.
Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance
during instruction does not work: An analysis of the failure of construc-
tivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teach-
ing. Educational Psychologist, 41, 75–86.
Kitchner, K. S. (1983). Cognition, metacognition, and epistemic cognition.
Human Development, 26, 222–232.
Kobayashi, K. (2006). Combined effects of note-taking/reviewing on
learning and the enhancement through interventions: A meta-analytic
review. Educational Psychology, 26, 459–477.
Kramarski, B., & Dudai, V. (2009). Group-metacognitive support for
online inquiry in mathematics with differential self-questioning. Journal
of Educational Computing Research, 40, 377–404.
Loyens, S. M. M., & Gijbels, D. (2008). Understanding the effects of con-
structivist learning environments: Introducing a multi-directional
approach. Instructional Science, 36, 351–357.
Mastropieri, M. A., Scruggs, T., Mohler, L., Beranek, M., Spencer, V.,
Boon, R. T., & Talbott, E. (2001). Can middle school students with seri-
ous reading difﬁculties help each other and learn anything? Learning
Disabilities Research & Practice , 16, 18–27.
Mastropieri, M. A., Scruggs, T. E., Spencer, V., & Fontana, J. (2003). Pro-
moting success in high school world history: Peer tutoring versus guided
notes. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice , 18, 52–65.
Mayer, R. E. (2004). Should there be a three-strikes rule against pure dis-
covery learning? The case for guided methods of instruction. American
Psychologist, 59, 14–19.
Mayer, R. E. (2008).
Learning and instruction (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
McEldoon, K. L. (2014). Supporting novice learning through focused
processing of worked examples and explanations . (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
McEldoon, K. L., Durkin, K. L., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2013). Is self-expla-
nation worth the time? A comparison to additional-practice. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 615–632.
Menekse, M., Stump, G., Krause, S., & Chi, M. T. H. (2013). Differenti-
ated overt learning activities for effective instruction in engineering
classrooms. Journal of Engineering Education, 102, 346–374.
Mestre, J. P. (2002). Probing adults’ conceptual understanding and transfer
of learning via problem posing. Journal of Applied Developmental Psy-
chology, 23, 9–50.
Meyers, C., & Jones, T. B. (1993). Promoting Active Learning. Strategies
for the College Classroom . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Milrad, M. (2002). Using construction kits, modeling tools and system
dynamics simulations to support collaborative discover learning. Educa-
tional Technology and Society , 5, 76–87.
Nesbit, J. C., & Adesope, O. O. (2006). Learning with concept and knowledge
maps: A metaanalysis.Review of Educational Research, 76, 413–448.
Novak, J. D. (1990). Concept mapping: A useful tool for science education.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 27, 937–949.
Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D. B. (1984). Learning how to learn . New York,
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Oakhill, J. V., Cain, K., & Bryant, P. E. (2003). The dissociation of word
reading and text comprehension: Evidence from component skills. Lan-
guage and Cognitive Processes, 18, 443–468.
O’Donnell, A. M., Dansereau, D. F., & Hall, R. H. (2002). Knowledge
maps as scaffolds for cognitive processing. Educational Psychology
Review, 14, 71–86.
242 CHI AND WYLIE
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
Okada, T., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Collaborative discovery in a scientiﬁc
domain. Cognitive Science, 21, 109–146.
Okebukola, P. A., & Jegede, O. J. (1988). Cognitive preference and learn-
ing mode as determinants of meaningful learning through concept map-
ping. Science Education, 72, 489–500.
O’Reilly, T., Symons, S., & MacLatchy-Gaudet, H. (1998). Brief research
report: A comparison of self-explanation and elaborative interrogation.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 23, 434–445.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers and powerful ideas .
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Pea, R., & Kurland, M. (1984). On the cognitive effects of learning com-
puter programming. New Ideas in Psychology , 2, 137–168.
Pelech, J. (2010). The comprehensive handbook of constructivist teaching:
From theory to practice. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Peper, R. J., & Mayer, R. E. (1986). Generative effects of note-taking dur-
ing science lectures. Journal of Educational Psychology, 78, 34–38.
Piaget, J. (1930). The child’s conception of physical causality . Oxford,
England: Harcourt Brace.
Pillow, B. H., Mash, C., Aloian, S., & Hill, V. (2002). Facilitating child-
ren’s understanding of misinterpretation: Explanatory efforts and
improvements in perspective taking. The Journal of Genetic Psychology,
163, 133–148.
Pine, K. J., & Messer, D. J. (2000). The effect of explaining another’s
actions on children’s implicit theories of balance. Cognition and Instruc-
tion, 18, 35–52.
Pintrich, P. R., & De Groot, E. (1990). Motivation and self regulation com-
ponents of academic performance. Journal of Educational Psychology ,
82, 33–40.
Rafal, C. T. (1996). From co-construction to takeovers: Science talk in a
group of four girls. Journal of Learning Sciences, 5, 279–293.
Renkl, A., Stark, R., Gruber, H., & Mandl, H. (1998). Learning
from worked-out examples: The effects of example variability and
elicited self-explanations. Contemporary Educational Psychology , 23,
90–108.
Rickards, J. P., & Friedman, F. (1978). The encoding versus the external
storage hypothesis in note taking. Contemporary Educational Psychol-
ogy, 3, 136–143.
Roscoe, R. D., & Chi, M. T. H. (2007). Understanding tutor learning:
Knowledge-building and knowledge-telling in peer tutors’ explanations
and questions. Review of Educational Research, 77, 534–574.
Rosenthal, J. S. (1995). Active learning strategies in advanced mathematics
classes. Studies in Higher Education, 20, 223–228.
Rouet, J.-F., Britt, M. A., Mason, R. A., & Perfetti, C. A. (1996). Using
multiple sources of evidence to reason about history. Journal of Educa-
tional Psychology, 88, 478–493.
Rowles, C. J. (2013). Strategies to promote critical thinking and active
learning. Teaching in nursing: A guide for faculty , 258–279.
Rubin, J., & Herbert, M. (1998). Peer teaching-model for active learning.
College Teaching, 48, 26–30.
Russell, I. J., Caris, T. N., Harris, G. D., & Hendricson, W. D. (1983).
Effects of three types of lecture notes on medical student achievement.
Academic Medicine, 58, 627–636.
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1998). Individual and social aspects of
learning. Review of Research in Education , 23, 1–24.
Scardamalia, M. (1992, July). The role of adaptation and understanding in
knowledge-building communities . Paper presented at conference of
NATO Advanced Science Institute, Kolymbari Crete, Greece.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995).
Journal of the learning students’ understanding of the objectives and
procedures of experimentation in the science classroom. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 4, 131–166.
Schmid, R. F. & Telaro, G. (1990). Concept mapping as an instructional
strategy for high school biology. Journal of Educational Research , 84,
78–85.
Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling a time for
telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 475–522.
Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., & Biezuner, S. (2000). Two wrongs may
make a right ... if they argue together! Cognition and Instruction , 18,
461–494.
Siegler, R. (1995). How does change occur: A microgenetic study of num-
ber conservation. Cognitive Psychology, 28, 225–273.
Stark, R. (1999). Lernen mit L €osungsbeisplielen: Einﬂuss unvollst €andiger
L€osungsbeispiele auf Beispielelaboration, Motivation and Lernerfolg
[Learning by worked-out examples: The impact of completion tasks on
example elaboration, motivation and learning outcomes]. Bern, Switzer-
land: Huber.
Suthers, D. D., & Hundhausen, C. D. (2003). An experimental study of the
effects of representational guidance on collaborative learning processes.
Journal of the Learning Sciences , 12, 183–218.
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difﬁculty, and instruc-
tional design. Learning and Instruction, 4, 295–312.
Trafton, J. G., & Trickett, S. B. (2001). Note-taking for self-explanation
and problem solving. Human–Computer Interaction, 16, 1–38.
van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2000). Collaborative
learning tasks and the elaboration of conceptual knowledge. Learning
and Instruction, 10, 311–330.
VanLehn, K., Graesser, A. C., Jackson, G. T., Jordan, P., Olney, A., &
Ros/C19e, C. P. (2007). When are tutorial dialogues more effective than
reading? Cognitive Science, 31
, 3–62.
VanLehn, K., Jones, R. M., & Chi, M. T. H. (1992). A model of the self-
explanation effect. The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 2, 1–59.
Von Glasersfeld, E. (1989). Cognition, construction of knowledge, and
teaching. Synthese, 80, 121–140.
Webb, N. M. (1989). Peer interaction, problem solving, and cognition:
Multidisciplinary perspectives. International Journal of Educational
Research, 13, 1–119.
Whitehead, A. N. (1929). The aims of education . New York, NY:
Macmillan.
Whitten, W. B., II. (2011). Learning from and for tests. In A. S. Benjamin
(Ed.), Successful remembering and successful forgetting: A festschrift in
honor of Robert A. Bjork (pp. 217–234). New York, NY: Psychology
Press.
Willerman, M., & Mac Harg, R. A. (1991). The concept map as an advance
organizer. Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 28, 705–711.
Wilson, B. G. (1997, March). Reﬂections on constructivism and instruc-
tional design, instructional development paradigms . Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Educational Technology.
Wong, R. M. F., Lawson, M. J., & Keeves, J. (2002). The effects of self-
explanation training on students’ problem solving in high-school mathe-
matics. Learning and Instruction, 12, 233–262.
Wylie, R. (2011). Examining the generality of self -explanation (Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation). Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA.
Yaron, D., Karabinos, M., Lange, D., Greeno, J. G., & Leinhardt, G.
(2010). The ChemCollective—virtual labs for introductory chemistry
courses. Science, 328, 584–585.
Yetter, G., Gutkin, T., Saunders, A., Galloway, A., Sobansky, R., & Song,
S. (2006). Individual practice for complex problem solving: A caution-
ary tale. Journal of Experimental Education, 74, 137–159.
Yin, Y., Vanides, J., Ruiz-Primo, M. A., Ayala, C. C., & Shavelson, R. J.
(2005). Comparison of two concept-mapping techniques: Implications
for scoring, interpretation, and use. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 42, 166–184.
Zhang, Z. H., & Linn, M. C. (2013). Learning from chemical visualiza-
tions: Comparing generation and selection. International Journal of Sci-
ence Education, 35, 2174–2197.
Zimmerman, B. J. (1990). Self-regulated learning and academic achieve-
ment: An overview. Educational Psychologist, 21, 3–17.
THE ICAP FRAMEWORK
243
Downloaded by [Arizona State University Libraries] at 15:42 12 February 2016 
