=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
S L 
INDEX 
(NASA- TLX) 
v 1.0 
Nl\5/\ 
Ames Research Center 

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Table of Contents 
1. Background 1 
2. Description 2 
2.1 General Information 
2.2 Sources of Load (Weights) 
2.3 Magnitude of load (Ratings) 
2.4 Weighting and Averaging Procedure 
3. Experimental Procedure 4 
3.1 Instructions 
3.2 Familiarization 
3.3 Ratings 
3.4 Weights 
3.5 Summary 
4. Data Analysis Procedure 6 
4 . t Tally Sheet 
4.2 Worksheet 
4.3 Summary 
5. Bibliography 8 
6 . Subject Instructions : Rating Scales 11 
7. Subject Instructions : Sources -of-Workload Evaluation 12 
Appendix A. Rating Scale Definitions 13 
Appendix B . Sources · of-Workload Comparison Cards 14 
Appendix C. Rating Sheet t 7 
Appendix D. Sources-of -Workload Talty Sheet 18 
Appendix E. Weighted Rating Worksheet l9 

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
NASA Task load Index (NASA-TLX) 
Version 1.0 
Paper and Pencil Package 
This booklet contains the mater-ials necessary to collect subjective 
workload assessments with the NASA Task load Jndex. This procedure for 
colletting workload ratings was developed by the Human Performance Group 
at NASA Ames Research Center during a three year research effort that 
involved more than 40 laboratory. simulation . and inflight experiments . 
Although the technique is still undergoing evaluation. this booklet is being 
distributed to allow other researchers to use it in their own experiments . 
Comments or suggestions about the procedure would be greatly apprec.iated . 
This package is intended to fill a "nuts and bolts" function of describing the 
procedure . A bibli~graphy provides background information about previous 
empirical findings and the logic that supports the procedure . 
1. BACKGROUND 
The NASA Task load Index is a multi -dimensional rating procedure 
that provides an overall workload score based on a weighted average or rat ­
ings on six subscates: Mental Demands . Physical Demands . Temporal 
Demands. Own Performance . Effort . and Frustration . A definttion of each 
subscale is provided in Appendix A. 
An earlier version of the scale had nine subscales . It was designed to 
reduce between -rater variability by using the a priori workload definitions of 
. subjects to weight and average subscale ratings . This technique (referred to 
as the ''NASA Bipolar Rattng Scale") was quite successful in reducing 
between -rater variability . and it provided diagnostic information about the 
magnitudes of different sources of load from subscaJe ratings (Hart . Bat ­
tiste. & lester. 1984: Vidulich &. Tsang. l98Sa & b) . However . its sensi ­
tivity to experimental manipulations. while better than found for other popu ­
lar techniques and for a global unidimensional workload rating . was still not 
considered sufficient . In addition . it was felt that nine subscales are too 
many. making the scale impractical to use in a simulation or operational 
environment. Finally , several of the subscales were found to be irrelevant to 
workload (e .g .. fatigue) or redundant (e .g .. Stress and Frustration) . For 
these reasons . the NASA Task load Index was developed . Some of the 
subscales from the original scale were revised or combined . others deleted . 
1 

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
and two added . Three dimensions relate to the demands imposed on the 
subject tMental. Physical . and Temporal Demands) and three to the interac ­
tion of a subject with the task (Effort . Frustration . and Performance) . 
Although it is clear that definitions of workload do indeed vary among 
experimenters and among subjects (contributing to confusion in the work­
load literature and between -rater variability). it was found that the specific 
sources of loading imposed by different tasks are an even more important 
determinant of workload experiences . Thus. the current version of the scale 
(the Task load Index) combines subscale ratings that are weighted accord­
ing to their subjective importance to raters in a specific task . rather than 
their a priori relevance to raters ' definitions of workload in general. 
2. DESCRIPTION 
2.1. General Information 
The degree to which each of the six factors contribute to the workload 
of the specific task to be evaluated. from the raters · perspectives. is deter ­
mined by their responses to pair-wise comparisons among the six factors . 
Magnitude ratings on each subscale are obtained after each performance of a 
task or task segment. Ratings of factors deemed most important in creating 
the workload of a task are given more weight in computing the overall work­
load score. thereby enhancing the sensitivity of the scale. 
The weights and ratings may or may not covary . For example . it is 
poss ible for mental demands to be the primary source of loading for a task . 
even though the magnitude of the mental demands might be low. Con­
versely . the time pressure under which a task is performed might be the pri­
mary source of its workload . and ttie time demands might be rated as being 
high for some versions of the task and low for others. 
Since subjects can give ratings quickly. it may be poss ible to obtain 
them in operational settings However. a videotaped replay or computer 
regeneration of the operator 's activities may be presented as a mnemonic. aid 
that can be stopped after each segment to obtain ratings retospec tively. It 
was shown in a helicopter simulation and in a supervisory <:ontrol simulation 
(Hart. Battiste . Chesney . Ward . & McElroy. 1986: Haworth . Bivens. and 
Shively . 1986) that little information was lost when ratings were given 
retrospectively : a high correlation was found between ratings that were 
obtained "online" and those that were obtained retrospectively with a visual 
re-creation of the ta sk. 
2 

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
The Task load Index has been tested in a variety of experimental 
tasks that range hom simulated flight to supervisory <.ontrol simulations and 
laboratory tasks (e.g .. the Sternberg memory task . choice reaction time. 
critical instability tracking . compensatory tracking . mental arithmetic . men­
tal rotation . target acquisition. grammatical reasoning . etc .). The results of 
the first validation study are summarized in Hart & Stave! and (in press) . 
The derived workload scores have been found to have substantially less 
between -rater variability than unidimensional workload ratings . and the sub­
scales provide diagnostic information about the sources of load 
2.2. Sources of Load (Weights) 
The NASA Task load Index is a two -part evaluation procedure con­
sisting of both weights and ratings. The first requirement is for each ra\er 
to evaluate the contribution of each factor (its weight) to the workload of a 
specific task . These weights account for two potential sourc.es of between ­
rater variability : differences in workload definition between raters within a 
task. and differences in the sources of workload between tasks . In addition . 
the weights themselves provide diagnostic information about the nature of 
the workload imposed by the task . 
There are 15 possible pair-wise comparisons of the six scales 
(Apppendix B) . Each pair is presented on a card . Subjects circle the 
member of each pair that conttibuted more to the workload of that task . 
The number of times that each factor is selected is tallied . The tallies can 
range from 0 (not relevant) to 5 (more important than any other factor) . 
A different set of weights is obtained for each dis tine tly different task 
or task element upon its completion . The same set of weights can be used 
for many different versions of the same task if the contrtbutions of the six 
factors to their workload ts fairly similar . For example . the same set of 
weights was used for many different versions of a target ac.quisition task in 
which time pressure . target acquisition difficulty . and decision making load 
were varied . Obtaining separate weights for different exper imental manipu ­
lation s increased the sensitivity of the derived workload score only slightly . 
and did not warrant the additional time required to gather them . On the 
other hand . the weights obtained from the same subjects for a compen satory 
tracking task or a memory search task would not have been appropriate for 
the target acquisition task . 
l 

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
2.3. Magnitude of load (Ratings) 
The second requirement is to obtain numerical ratings for each scale 
that reflect the magnitude of that factor in a given task. The scales are 
presented on a rating sheet (Appendix C). Subjects respond by marking 
each sc.ale at the desired location . In operational situations . rating sheets or 
verbal responses are more practical . while a computerized version (available 
from NASA Ames Research Center) is more efficient for most simulation 
and laboratory settings . Ratings may be obtained either during a task . after 
task segments . or following an entire task . Each scale is presented as a 
12-cm line divided into 20 equal •ntervals anchored by l>ipolar descriptors 
(e.g .. High/Low) . The 21 vertical tic.k marks on each scale divide the scale 
from 0 to 100 in increments of 5. If a subject marks between two ticks. the 
value of the right tick is used (i.e .. round up) . 
2.(. Weightlng and Averaging Procedure 
The overaU workload score for each subject is computed by multiply­
ing each rating by the weight given to that factor by that subject. The sum 
of the weighted ratings for each task is divided by 15 (the sum of the 
weights). (See Appendix D and E for a sample Tally Sheet and Worksheet .) 
3. EXPERIMENTAl PROCEDURE 
The usual sequence of events for collecting data with the NASA Task 
load Index is as follows: 
3.1. Instructions 
Subjects read the scale definitions and instructions. A set of 
generic instructions is included in Section 6. Some modifica­
tions may be necessary depending on your situation . 
3.2. Familiarization 
Subjects practice using the rating scales after performing a few 
tasks to insure that they have developed a standard technique 
for dealtng with the scales . 
3.3. Ratings 
Subjects perform the experimental tasks. providing ratings on 
the six subscales following all task conditions of interest . The 
number of rating sheets needed equals the number of subjects X 
( 

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
the number of task conditions (including practice) . 
3.4. Weights 
Subjects complete the "Sources-of -Workload Evaluation" once 
for each task or group of tasks included in the experiment that 
share a common structure (although difficulty levels may vary) . 
For example. in an experiment with several memory tasks and 
several tracking tasks. two Sources -of-Workload Evaluations 
would be performed : one for the memory tasks and one for the 
tracking tasks . One set of cards should be made in advance of 
the experiment for each subject X evaluation condition combina · 
tion . The pairs of factors should be cut apart and presented 
individually in a different. randomly selected. order to each sub­
ject . Subject instructions for doing the Sources -of-Workload 
Evaluation are in Section 7. (Note that the exact time when the 
weights are obtained is not critical. However . in order for them 
to provide useful information . they must be obtained after at 
least some exposure to the relevant task conditions .) 
3.5. Summary 
Following this procedure. you should end up with : (1) a set of work­
load weights from each subject for each &!~.~~of similar tasks. and (2) at 
least one rating sheet for each subject for each experimental task . Typi­
cally. we have run within-subject experiments - and therefore ended up with a 
larger number of rating sheets for each subject . 
To conserve paper and speed up the subsequent anafysis . we often 
enclose the Rating Sheet and the Sources-of -Workload comparison cards in 
clear plastic . Subjects mark the scales with an erasable felt tip marker . 
Immediately after they are marked. the experimenter transfers the responses 
onto the app.ropriate form or worksheet . Then the plastic sheets are cleaned 
and reused. If this procedure is followed . DOUBLE CHECK YOURSELF 
BEFORE ERASING THE SUBJECT'S RESPONSES! 
4. DATA ANALYSIS PROCEDURE 
The procedure for computing a weighted workload score follows : 
5 

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
1.1. Tally Sheet 
For each subject. the '!Sources-of-Workload Tally Sheet" 
(Appendix 0) is used to compute the weight for each factor . 
The scorer simply leafs through the evaluation cards and puts a 
mark on the appropriate row of the tally column for each 
response of the subject (e.g .. each time the subject circled 
"Mental Demandu on a comparison card. the experimenter would 
put a mark in the 'Mental Demand 11 row of the tally column) . 
After going through the Sources -of-Workload evaluation . the 
experimenter adds the tallies for each scale and writes the totals 
in the "Weight" column . 
1.2 . Worksheet 
The Weight column from the tally sheet is then transferred to 
the 'Weighted Rating Workshee t" (Appendix E). Each subject 
would have his or her individual workload parameters count 
placed on a separate worksheet for the appropriate task or set of 
similar tasks . If subjects rated more than one task , the 
appropriate number of copies of the worksheet should be made . 
Ratings are placed in the "Raw Rating" column of the worksheet . 
The 11Adjusted Rating" is formed by multiplying the Raw Rating 
by the Sources-of-Workload Weight. The adjusted ratings are 
summed across the different scales . The sum is divided by 15 
to obtain the overall weighted workload score for the subject in 
that one task condition . 
The weighted ratings are then used as a dependent measure in what­
ever type of analyses the experimenter chooses. 
Figure 1 depicts the composition of a weighted workload score graphi ­
cally . The bar graph on the left represents six subscale ratings . The width 
of the subscale bars reflects the importance of each factor (its weight) . and 
the height represents the magnitude of each factor (its rating) in a particular 
task . The weighted workload score (the bar on the right) represents the 
average area of the subscale bars . 
1.3. Summary 
The above procedure. although simple . can be laborious for a large 
experiment. Thus it is highly advantageous to computerize the procedure . 
A set of programs that run on IBM-PC compatible machines has been 
6 

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
100 
80 
(!) 
z 60 
~ 40 
cr 
20 
0 
,... 
f-
OVERALLWORKLOAD(OW)= 
MEAN OF WEIGHTED RATINGS 
I 
'=- -~~:::~:::: ~ 
f.- ~ ::::::;::: r" ,_ ::::::f::: ,_ .......... ["-
;: ~ :: }' :: 
PO MD TO OP EF FR 
IMPORTANCE WEIGHT 
j 
OVERALL 
WORKLOAD 
Figure 1: Graphic example of the composition of a 
weighted workload score 
written to gather ratings and weights . and compute the weighted workload 
scores . These are available upon request from NASA Ames Research 
Center . However. if this is not a viable option . aU the necessary materials 
are induded in this booklet . If you have any questions . comments, or 
suggestions please do not hesitate to contact us . This procedure is stilt 
under evaluation and we are always looking for new ideas . 
1 

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
5 . BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Biferno . M . A. (1985) . Mental workload measureme6t : Event-related poten­
tials and ratings of workload and fatigue (NASA CR 177354). 
Moffett Field . CA : NASA Ames Research Center . 
Bortolussi. M. R .. Kantowitz . B. H .. &. Hart . S . G. (1985) . Measuring pilot 
workload in a motion base trainer : A comparison of four tech ­
niques . In R S. Jensen & J Adrion (Eds .) . Proceedings of the 
Third Sympo sium on Aviation Psychology (pp . 263-270) . 
Columbus . OH : OSU Aviation Psychology Laboratory . 
Hart. S G .. Battiste . V .. & lester . P T . (1984) . Popcorn : A supervisory 
control simulation for workload and performance research . In 
Twentieth Annual Conference on Manual Control (pp . 431 ~ 454) . 
Washington . D .C. : NASA Conference Publication 2341. 
Hart . S G .. Battiste . V . Chesney. M. A .. Ward . M . M .. and McElroy . M. 
(1986) . Comp arison of workload . performance . and cardiovascu ­
lar measures : Type A personalities vs Type B Working paper 
Moffett Field. CA NASA Ames Research Center . 
Hart. S G.. Sellers . J. J.. & Guthart . G. ( 1984) . The impact of response 
selection and respon se execution difficulty on the subjective 
experience of workload . Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting 
of the Human Factors Society (pp . 132-736) . Santa Monica . 
CA : Human Factors Society . 
Hart . S . G .. Shively . R. J.. ViduUch. M. A .. & Miller, R. C. {1986) . The 
effec t s o f stimu lus modality and ta.sk integrality : Predicting 
dual -task perfNmance and workload from single -task levels . In 
Twenty-First Annual Conference on Manual Control (pp . S.t -
5.18) Washington . D. C.: NASA Conference Publication 2~28 . 
Hart . S . G .. &. Staveland . l. E. (In pres s) . Development of a multi ­
di men s~onal workload rating scale : Results of empirical and 
theoretical res earch. In P . A. Hancock It N. Meshkat i (Eds .). 
Human Mental Workload. Amsterdam . The Netherlands : 
Elsevier . 
8 

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Haworth . l. A .. Bivens . C. C.. &. Shively. R. J . (1986) . An investigation of 
single -piloted advanced cockpit and control configurations for 
nap -of-the -earth helicopter combat mission tasks . Proceedings 
of the 1986 Meeting of the American Helicopter Society (pp . 
657 -672) . Washington . D.C. 
Kantowitz . B. H .. Hart . S . G .. Bortolussi . M. R .. Shively. R. J.. It Kan­
towitz . S. C. {1984) . Measuring pilot workload in a moving­
base simulator : 11 Building levels of workload . In Twentieth 
Annual Conference on Manual Control (pp . 359-372) . Washing ­
ton . D.C. : NASA Conferenc,e Publication 2341 . 
Miller. R. C .. &. Hart . S . G. (198-4). Assessing the subject ive workload of 
directional orientat ion tasks . tn Twentieth Annual Conference 
on Manual Control (pp. 85-95) . Washington . D.C.: NASA 
Conference Publication 2341. 
Mosier . K. l.. &. Hart. S . G. {1986) . levels of information processing in a 
Fitts law task (liPF itts) . In Twenty-First Annual Conference 
on Manual Control (pp . 4.1-415). Washington . DC . NASA 
Conference Publica tion 2428 . 
Staveland . l. E .. Hart . S . G .. &. Yeh. Y -Y. (1986) . Memory and subjective 
workload assessment . In Twenty-First Annual Meeting on 
Manual Control. (pp . 7.1-7.13}. Washington . D.C.: NASA 
Conference Publication 2428 . 
Vidulich. M. A .. &. Tsang . P . S . (1985a) . Techniques of subjective work­
load assessment: A compari son of two methodologies . In R. S . 
Jensen&. J . Adrion (Eds .). Proceedings of the Third Symposium 
on Aviation Psychology (pp . 239-246) . Columbus . OH: OSU 
Aviation P sychology laboratory . 
Vidulich . M. A .. &. Tsang . P . S . (198Sb) . Asse ssing subjective workload 
asse ssment : A comparison of SWAT and the NASA-Bipolar 
methods . Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 29th 
Annual Meeting. {pp. 71-75). Santa Monica . CA: Human Fac­
tors Society . 
g 

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Vidulich . M. A. & Tsang . P S (1986) . Collecting NASA Workload Rat-
ings A Paper and Pencil Package . Working Paper . Moffett 
Field . CA: NASA Ames Research Center . 
Vidulich . M A & Tsang. P S (in press) Techniques of subjective work ­
load assessment A comparison of SWAT and the NASA Bipo­
lar Method . Ergonomics. 
Yeh . Y · Y . & Wickens . C D . {1985) . The effect of varying task difficulty 
on subjective workload . In Proceedings of the Human Factors 
Society 29th Annual Meeting. (pp . 765-769}. Santa Monica . 
CA Human Factors Society . 
to 

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
6. SUBJECT INSTRUCTIONS: RATING SCALES 
We are not only interested in assessing your performance but also the 
experiences you had during the different task conditions . Right now we are 
going to describe the technique that will be used to examine your experi­
ences . In the most general sense we are examining the "workload" you 
experienced . Workload is a difficult concept to define precisely . but a simple 
one to understand generally . The factors that influence your experience of 
workload may come from the task itself . your feelings about your own per­
formance . how much effort you put in. or the stress and frustration you felt . 
The workload contributed by different task elements may change as you get 
more familiar with a task . perform easier or harder versions of it . or move 
from one task to another. Physical components of workload are relatively 
easy to conceptualize and evaluate . However . the mental components of 
workload may be more difficult to measure 
Since workload is something that is experienced individually by each 
person. there are no effective nrulers" that can be used to estima~e the work­
load of different activities . One way to find out about workload is to ask 
people to describe the feeling s they experienced . Because workload may be 
caused by many different factors . we would like you to evaluate several of 
them individually rather than lumping them into a single global evaluation of 
overall workload This set of six rating scales was developed for you to use 
in evaluating your experiences during different tasks . Please read the 
descriptions of the scales carefully . If you have a question about any of the 
scales in the table . please ask me about it . It is extremely important that 
they be clear to you . You may keep the descriptions with you for reference 
during the experiment . 
After performing each of the tasks . you will be given a sheet of rating 
scales . You will evaluate the task by putting an "X" on each of the six scales 
at the point which matches your experience . Each line has two endpoint 
descriptors that describe the scale . Note that "own performance" goes from 
"good 11 on the left to 'bad" on the right . This order has been confusing for 
some people . Please consider your responses carefully in distinguishing 
among the different task conditions . Consider each scale individually . Your 
ratings will play an important role in the evaluation being conducted. thus . 
your active participation is essential to the succe ss of this experiment and is 
greatly appreciated by all of us . 
11 

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
7. SUBJECT INSTRUCTIONS : SOURCES-OF-WORKLOAD 
EVALUATION 
Throughout this experiment the rating scales are used to assess your 
experiences in the different task conditions . Scales of this sort are extremely 
useful. but their utility suffers from the tendency people have to interpret 
them in individual ways . For example. some people feel that mental or tem­
poral demands are the essential aspects of workload regardless of the effort 
they expended on a given task or the level of performance they achieved . 
Others feel that if they per~.)rmed well the workload must have been low and 
if they performed badly it must have been high . Yet others feel that effort or 
feelings of frustration are the most important factors in workload: and so 
on The results of previous studies have already found every conceivable 
pattern of values In addition . the factors that create levels of workload 
differ depending on the task . for example. some tasks might be difficult 
because they must be completed very quickly . Others may seem easy or 
hard because of the intensity of mental or physical effort required . Yet oth~ 
ers feel difficult because they cannot be performed well. no matter how 
much effort is expended . 
The evaluation you are about to perform is a technique that has been 
developed by NASA to assess the relative importance of six factors in deter­
mining how much workload you experienced . The procedure is simple : You 
will be presented with a series of pairs of rating scale titles (for example . 
Effort vs. Mental Demands) and asked to choose which of the items was 
more important to y~~! experience of workload in the task(s) that you just 
performed _ Each pair of scale titles will appear on a separate card . 
9!.~!~ . t~~ . ?~~!~Tit.!! ~~-~! .... ~-~~~- ~~~!.~ ... !!!.~ ~~!.~ .. ~.!!'_ep.!ta!_l.!_ contributor 
~~-~~!~~~~ !.C?~~~~ .. ~p-~~~~~.J~~-!1~ __ }/~~~!!orme~ in this experiment . 
After you have finished the entire series we will be able to use the pat­
tern of your choices to create a weighted combination of the ratings from 
that task into a summary workload score . Please consider your choices care­
fully and make them consistent with how you used the rating scales during 
the particular task you were asked to evaluate . Don't think that there is any 
correct pattern. we are only interested in your opinions. 
If you have any questions . please ask t.hem now . Otherwise. start 
whenever you are ready Thank you for your participation 
12 

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
MENTAL 
DEMAND 
PHYSICAl 
DEMAND 
TEMPORAl 
DEMAND 
PERFORMANCE 
EFFORT 
FRUSTRATION 
LEVEL 
Appendix A. 
RATING SCALE DEFINITIONS 
Low/High 
Low/High 
Low/High 
goodjpoor 
Low/High 
Low/High 
How much mental and perceptual 
activit y was required (e g . thinking . 
dedding _ calculating remembering . 
looking . searching . etc )' Was the 
task easy or demanding . simple or 
c.omplex. exacting or forgiving? 
How much physical activity was 
required (e.g .. pushing . pulling . turn ­
ing. controlling. activating . etc.)7 
Was the task easy or demanding . 
slow or brisk. slack or strenuous . 
restful or laborious 7 
How much time pressure did you feel 
due to the rate or pau at which the 
tasks or task elements occurred? Was 
the pace slow and leisurely or rapid 
and frantic? 
How successful do you think you were 
in accomplishing the goals of the task 
set by the experimenter (or yourself)? 
How satisfied were you with your per­
formance in accomplishing these 
goals? 
How hard did you have to work (men­
tally and physically) to accomplish 
your level or performance 7 
How insecure . discouraged . irritated 
stressed and annoyed versus secure . 
gratified . content . relaxed and wmpla· 
cent did you feel during the task 1 
13 

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
Appendi>< B. 
Sources -of· Workload Comparison Cards 
14 

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
Effort Temporal Demand 
or or 
Performance Frustration 
• • • • • 
Temporal Demand Physical Demand 
or • or 
Effort Frustration 
• • • • • 
• 
Performance Physical Demand 
or • or 
Fru~tration Temporal Demand 
• 
• 
• 
• . • . 
Physical Demand Temporal Demand 
or or 
Performance 15 Mental Demand 

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
Frustration Performance 
or or 
Effort Mental Demand 
. .. • • 
• 
Performance Mental Demand 
or or 
• 
Temporal Demand Effort 
... 
Mental Demand • Effort 
or • or 
• 
Physical Demand Physical Demand 
• • • 
Frustration 
or 
Mental Demand 
16 

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Appendix C 
Subject 10: ____ Task 10:------
RATING SHEET 
MENTAL DEMAND 
I I I 
Low High 
PHYSICAL DEMAND 
I I I I I I I I I I 
Low High 
TEMPORAL DEMAND 
I I l I I I I I I 1 
Low High 
PERFORMANCE 
1 I I I 1 I I I 
Good Poor 
EFFORT 
I I I I I I I I I I 
Low High 
FRUSTRATION 
I I I I I I I I 
Low High 
11 

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
Appendix D. 
Subject tO: Date:------
-
SOURCES-OF-WORKLOAD TALLY SHEET 
·----· ,..---...... 
Scale Tille Tally Weight 
MENTAl DEMAND 
PHYSICAL DEMAND 
TEMPORAL DEMAND 
PERFORMANCE 
EFFORT 
FRUSTRATION 
Total count = 
(NOTE - The total count is included as a check . If 
the total count is not equal to 15. then something has 
been miscounted . Also. no weight can have a value 
greater than 5.) 
18 

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
Appendix E. 
Subjed ID: ----- Task ID: 
-·-·---------~··-·--------
WEIGHTED RATING WORKSHEET 
·------ ·····---- -·-··- - - · r--· 
Scale Title Weight Raw Adjusted Rating 
Rating (Weight X Raw) 
-
MENTAl DEMAND 
PHYSICAl DEMAND 
t---·--·------- --
TEMPORAl DEMAND 
-
PERFORMANCE 
EFFORT 
----- --
FRUSTRATION 
·-
Sum of "Adjusted Rating" Column = 
WEIGHTED RATING = 
(i.e .. (Sum of Adjusted Ratings)/15J D 
19 