=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 Student Session , pages 94–98,
Portland, OR, USA 19-24 June 2011. c⃝2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Turn-Taking Cues in a Human Tutoring Corpus 
 
 
Heather Friedberg 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA 
friedberg@cs.pitt.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Most spoken dialogue systems are still 
lacking in their ability t o accurately model 
the complex process  that is  human turn -
taking.  This research analyzes a human -
human tutoring corpus in order to identify 
prosodic turn -taking cues , with the hopes 
that they can be used by intelligent tutoring 
systems to predict student turn boundaries.  
Results show that while there was variation 
between subject s, three features were si g-
nificant turn-yielding cues overall.  In addi-
tion, a positive relationship between the 
number of cues present and the prob ability 
of a turn yield was demonstrated. 
1 Introduction 
Human conversation is a seemingly simple, ever y-
day phenomenon that requires a complex mental 
process of turn -taking, in which participants ma n-
age to yield and hold the floor with little pause in -
between speaking turns.  Most linguis ts subscribe 
to the idea that this process  is governed by a  sub-
conscious internal mechanism, that is, a set of cues 
or rules that  steers humans toward proper turn -
taking (Duncan, 1972).  These cues may include 
lexical features such as the words used to end  the 
turn, or prosodic features such as speaking rate, 
pitch, and intensity (Cutler and Pearson, 1986). 
While successful turn -taking is fairly easy for 
humans to accomplish, it is still difficult for mo d-
els to be implement ed in spoken dialogue sy s-
tems.  Many systems use a  set time-out to decide 
when a user is finished speaking, often r esulting in 
unnaturally long pauses or awkward overlaps 
(Ward, et. al., 2005) .  Others detect when a user 
interrupts the system, known as “barge -in”, though 
this is characteristic of failed turn -taking rather 
than successful conversation (Glass, 1999).   
Improper turn-taking can often be a source of us-
er discomfort and dissatisfaction with a spoken 
dialogue system.   Little work has been done to 
study turn-taking in tutoring, so  we hope to inves-
tigate it further while using a human -human (HH) 
tutoring corpus and language technologies to e x-
tract useful info rmation about turn -taking cues.  
This analysis is particular ly interesting in a tuto r-
ing domain because of the  speculated unequal sta-
tuses of participants.  The goal is to eventually 
develop a model for turn-taking based on this anal-
ysis which can be implemented in an existent tutor-
ing system, ITSPOKE, an intelligent tutor for 
college-level Newtonian physics  (Litman and Si l-
liman, 2004).  ITSPOKE currently uses a time -out 
to determine the end of a student turn and does not 
recognize student barge -in.  We hypo thesize that 
improving upon the turn-taking model this system 
uses will help engage students and hopefully lead 
to i ncreased student learning , a standard perfo r-
mance measure of intelligent tutoring systems 
(Litman et. al., 2006). 
2 Related Work 
Turn-taking has been a recent focus in spoken di-
alogue system work, with research producing 
many different models and approaches .  Raux and 
Eskenazi (2009) proposed a finite-state turn-taking 
94

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
model, which is used to predict end-of-turn and 
performed significantly better than a ﬁxed -
threshold baseline in reducing endpointing latency  
in a spoken dialo gue system.  Selfridge and He e-
man (2010) took a different approach and p re-
sented a bidding model for turn -taking, in which 
dialogue participants compete for the turn based on 
the importance of what they will say next. 
Of considerable inspiration to the research in this 
paper was Gravano and Hirschberg’s (2009) analy-
sis of their games corpus, which showed that it was 
possible for turn -yielding cues to be identified in 
an HH corpus.  A similar method was used in this 
analysis, though it was adapted based on the tools 
and data that were readily available for our corpus.  
Since these differences may prevent direct compar-
ison between corpo ra, future work will f ocus on 
making our method more analogous.   
Since our work is similar to that done by Grav a-
no and Hirschberg (2009), we hypothesize  that 
turn-yielding cues can also be identified in our HH 
tutoring corpus.  However, it is possible tha t the 
cues identified will be very different, due to factors 
specific to a tutoring enviro nment.  These include, 
but are not limited to , status differences b etween 
the student and tutor, engagement of the student, 
and the different goals of the student and tutor. 
Our hypothesis is  that for certain prosodic fe a-
tures, there will be a significant difference between 
places where students yield their turn (allow the 
tutor to speak) and places where they hold it  (con-
tinue talking).  This would designate these features 
as turn-taking cue s, and would allow  them to be 
used as features in a turn -taking model for a sp o-
ken dialogue system in the future.   
3 Method 
The data for this analysis is from an HH tutoring 
corpus recorded during the  2002-2003 school 
year.  This is an audio corpus of 17 university stu-
dents, all native Standard English speakers, work-
ing with a tutor (the same for all subjects) on 
physics problems (Litman et. al., 2006 ).  Both the 
student and the tutor were sitting in front of sep a-
rate work stations, so they could communicate only 
through microphones or, in the case of a student -
written essay, through the shared computer env i-
ronment.  Any potential turn -taking cues that the 
tutor received from the student were very co mpa-
rable to what a spoken dialogue system would have 
to analyze during a user interaction. 
For each participant, student speech was iso-
lated and segmented into breath groups.  A breath 
group is defined as any segment of speech by one 
dialogue participant bounded by 200  ms of silence 
or more  based on a certain threshold of intensity  
(Liscombe et. al., 2005).  This break-down allowed 
for feature me asurement and comparison at places 
that were and were not turn  boundaries.  Although 
Gravano and Hirschberg  (2009) segmented their 
corpus by 50 ms of silence, we used 200 ms to di-
vide the breath groups , as this data had already 
been calculated for another exp eriment done with 
the HH corpus (Liscombe et. al., 2005). 1   
 
 
 
Figure 1. Conversation Segmented into Breath Groups 
 
Each breath group was automatically labeled as 
one of the followi ng: HOLD, when a breath group 
was immediately followed by a second  breath 
group from the same person , YIELD, when a 
breath group was immediately followed by speech 
from the other participa nt, or OVERLAP, when 
speech from another participant started b efore the 
current one ended .  Figure 1 is a diagram of a hy-
pothetical conversation b etween two parti cipants, 
with exa mples of HOLD’s and YIELD’s labeled.  
These groups were determined strictly by tim e and 
not by the actually speech being spoken.  Speech 
acts such as backchannels, then, would be included 
in the YIELD group if they were spoken during 
clear gaps in the tutor’s speech, but would be 
placed in  the OVERLAP group if they occurred 
during or ov erlapping with tutor speech.  There 
were 9,169 total HOLD's in the corpus and 4,773 
YIELD’s; these were used for comparison, while 
the OVERLAP’s were set aside for future work. 
Four prosodic features were calculated for each 
breath group: duration, pitch, RMS, and percent 
silence.  Duration is the length of the breath group 
in seconds.  Pitch is the mean fundamental fr e-
quency (f0) of the speech.  RMS (the root mean 
                                                           
1 Many thanks to the researchers at Columbia University for 
providing the breath group data for this corpus. 
95

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
squared amplitude) is the energy or loudness.  Per-
cent silence was the amount of internal sil ence 
within the breath group.   For pitch and RMS, the 
mean was taken over the length of the breath 
group.    These features were used because they are 
similar to those used by Gravano and Hi rschberg 
(2009), and are already used in the spoken dialo-
gue system  we will be using  (Forbes-Riley and 
Litman, 2011).  While only a small set of features 
is examined here, future work will include expand-
ing the feature set. 
Mean values for each feature  for HOLD’s and 
YIELD’s were calculated and comp ared using the 
student T-test in SPSS Statistics software .  Two 
separate tests were done, one to compare the 
means for each student indiv idually, and one to 
compare the means across all students.   p ≤ .05 is 
considered significant for all statistical tests.  The 
p-values given are the probability of obtaining the 
difference between groups by chance. 
4 Results 
4.1 Individual Cues 
First, means for each feature for HOLD’s and 
YIELD’s were compared for each su bject indiv i-
dually.  These i ndividual results indicated that 
while turn -taking cues could be identified, there 
was much variation between students.  Table 1 
displays the results of the ana lysis for one subject, 
student 111.  For this student, all four prosodic fea-
tures are turn -taking cues, as there is a significant 
different between the HOLD and YIELD groups 
for all of them.  Ho wever, for all other  students, 
this was not the c ase.  As shown in Table 3 , mul-
tiple significant cues could be identified  for most 
students, and there was only one which appeared to 
have no significant turn-yielding cues. 
Because there was so much individual variation, 
a paired T -test was used to compare the means  
across su bjects.  In this analysis , duration, pitch, 
and RMS were all found to be signifi cant cues .  
Percent silence, however, was not.  The results of 
this test are summarized in Ta ble 2 .  A more d e-
tailed look at each of the three significant cues is 
done below. 
 
Number of  
Significant Cues 
Number of  
Students 
0 1 
1 0 
2 6 
3 9 
4 1 
Table 3. Number of Students with  
Significant Cues 
 
Duration: The mean duration for HOLD’s is 
longer than the mean duration  for YIELD’s.  This 
suggests that students speak  for a longer uninter-
rupted time when they are trying to hold their turn, 
and yield their turns with shorter utterances. This is 
the opposite of Gravano and Hirschbe rg’s (2009) 
results, which found that YIELD’s were longer. 
Pitch: The mean pitch for YIELD’s is higher  
than the mean pitch for HOLD’s.  Gravano and 
Hirschberg (2009), on the other hand, found that 
YIELD’s were lower pitch ed than HOLD’s .  This 
difference may be accounted for by the difference 
in tasks .  During tutoring , students are possibly 
 N duration percent silence pitch RMS 
HOLD Group Mean 993 1.07 0.34 102.24 165.27 
YIELD Group Mean 480 0.78 0.39 114.87 138.89 
Significance  * p = 0.018 * p < 0.001 * p < 0.001 * p < 0.001 
Table 1. Individual Results for Subject 111 
* denotes a significant p value 
 N duration percent silence pitch RMS 
HOLD Group Mean 17 1.49 0.300 140.44 418.00 
YIELD Group Mean 17 0.82 0.310 147.58 354.65 
Significance  * p = 0.022 p = 0.590 * p = 0.009 * p < 0.001 
Table 2. Results from Paired T-Test 
96

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
more uncertain, which may raise the mean pitch of 
the YIELD breath groups. 
RMS: The mean RMS, or energy, for HOLD’s is 
higher than the mean energy for YIELD’s.  This is 
consistent with student’s speaking more softly, i.e., 
trailing off, at the end of their turn, a usual pheno-
menon in human speech .  This is consistent with 
the results from the Columbia games  corpus (Gra-
vano and Hirshberg, 2009). 
4.2 Combining Cues 
Gravano and Hirschberg (2009) were able to show 
using their cues and corpus  that there is a positive 
relationship between the number of turn -yielding 
cues present and the probability of a turn actually 
being taken .  This suggests that i n order to make 
sure that the other participant is aware whether the 
turn is going to continue or end, the speaker may 
subconsciously give them more info rmation 
through multiple cues. 
To see whether this relationship exist ed in  our 
data, each breath group was marked with a bi nary 
value for each significant cue , representing wheth-
er the cue was present or not present within that 
breath group.  A cue was considered present if the 
value for that breath group was strictly close r to 
the student’s mean for YIELD’s than 
HOLD’s.  The number of cues present for each 
breath group was totaled.   Only the three cues 
found to be significant cues were used for these 
calculations.  For each number of cues possible x 
(0 to 3, inclusively), the probability of the turn b e-
ing taken was calculated by p(x) = Y / T, where Y is 
the number of YIELD’s with x cues present, and T 
is the total number of breath groups with x cues 
present. 
 
Figure 2. Cues Present v. Probability of YIELD 
 
According to these results, a positive relationship 
seems to exist for these cues and this corpus.  Fig-
ure 2 shows the results plotted with a fitted regre s-
sion.  The number of cues present and probability 
of a turn yield is  strongly correlated (r = .923 , 
p=.038).  A r egression analysis done using SPSS 
showed that the adjusted r2 = .779 (p = .077). 
When no turn -yielding cues are present, there is 
still a majority chance that the st udent will yield 
their turn; h owever, this is under standable due to 
the small number of cues being a nalyzed.  Regard-
less, this  gives a very preliminary su pport for the 
idea that it is  possible to pr edict when a turn will 
be taken based on the number of cues present.  
5 Conclusions 
This paper presented prelimina ry work in using an 
HH tutoring corpus to construct a turn-taking mod-
el that can later be implemented in a spoken dial o-
gue system.  A small set of prosodic features was 
used to try and identify turn -taking cues by co m-
paring their values at places where students yielded 
their turn to the tutor and plac es where they held 
it.  Results show that turn-taking cues such as those 
investigated can be identified for the corpus, and 
may hold predictive ability for turn boundaries. 
5.1 Future Work 
When building on this work, there are two diffe r-
ent directions in which  we can go.  While this 
work uncovers some interesting results in the tutor-
ing domain, there are some shortcomings in the 
method that may make it difficult to effectively 
evaluate the results.  As the breath group is diffe r-
ent from the segment  used in Grav ano and Hi r-
schberg’s (2009) experiment, and the set of 
prosodic features is smaller, direct comparison be-
comes quite difficult.  The differences between the 
two methods provide enough doubt for the results 
to truly be interpreted as contradictory.  Thus th e 
first line of future inquiry is to redo this method 
using a smaller silence boundary (50 ms) and di f-
ferent set of prosodic features so that it is truly 
comparable to Gravano and Hir schberg’s (2009) 
work with the game corpus.  This could yield i n-
teresting discoveries in the differences between the 
two corpora, shedding light on phenomena that are 
particular to tutoring scenarios.   
On the other hand, other researche rs have used 
different segments; for e xample, Clemens and D i-
ekhaus (2009) divide their corpu s by “to pic units” 
that are gra mmatically and semantically complete.  
In addition, Litman et. al. (2009) were able to use 
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
90.00%
100.00%
0 1 2 3
97

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
word-level units to ca lculate prosody and cla ssify 
turn-level uncertainty.  Perhaps direct comparison 
is not e ntirely ne cessary, and instead this work 
should be cons idered an isolated look at a n HH 
corpus that pr ovides insight into turn -taking, sp e-
cifically in tutoring and other d omains with u n-
equal power levels.   Future work in this direction 
would include growing the set of features by ad d-
ing more proso dic ones and intr oducing le xical 
ones such as bi-grams and uni -grams.  Already, 
work has been done to investigate the features used 
in the INTERSPEECH 2009  Emotion Challenge 
using openSMILE (Eyben et. al., 2009).    When a 
large feature bank has been developed, significant 
cues will be used in co njunction with machine 
learning techniques to build a model for turn -
taking which can be impl emented in a spoken d i-
alogue tutoring system.  The goal would be to learn 
more about human turn-taking while seeing  if bet-
ter turn-taking by a computer tutor ultimately leads 
to increased student learning in an intelligent tutor-
ing system. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the NSF ( #0631930).  
I would like to thank Diane Litman, my advisor, 
Scott Silliman, for  software assistance, Joanna 
Drummond, for many helpful comments on this 
paper, and the ITSPOKE research group for their 
feedback on my work.  
References  
Caroline Clemens and Christoph  Diekhaus.  2009. Pr o-
sodic turn -yielding Cues with and without optical 
Feedback. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Co n-
ference: The 10th Annual Meeting of the Special I n-
terest Group on Discourse and Dialogue . 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Anne Cutler and Mark  Pearson. 1986. On the analysis 
of prosodic turn-taking cues. In C. J ohns-Lewis, Ed., 
Intonation in Discourse, pp. 139-156. College-Hill. 
Starkey Duncan. 1972. Some signals and rules for ta k-
ing speaking turns in conversations. Journal of Pe r-
sonality and Social Psychology, 24(2):283-292. 
Florian Eyben, Martin Wöllmer, Bj örn Schuller. 2010. 
openSMILE - The Munich Versatile and Fast Open -
Source Audio Feature Extractor. Proc. ACM Mult i-
media (MM), ACM, Florence, Italy. pp. 1459-1462. 
James R.  Glass. 1999. Challenges for spoken dialogue 
systems. In Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE ASRU 
Workshop. 
Agustín Gravano a nd Julia  Hirschberg. 2009. Turn -
yielding cues in task -oriented dialogue. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Conference: The 10th A n-
nual Mee ting of the Special Interest Group on 
Discourse and Dialogue , 253--261. Associ ation for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Jackson Liscombe, Julia  Hirschberg, and Jennifer J.  
Venditti. 2005. D etecting certainness in spoken t u-
torial dialogues. In Interspeech. 
Diane J. Litman, Carolyn P. Rose, Kate Forbes -Riley, 
Kurt VanLehn, Dumisiz we Bhembe, and Scott  Silli-
man. 2006. Spoken Versus Typed Human and Co m-
puter Dialogue Tutoring. In International Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 26: 145-170. 
Diane Litman, Mihai Rotaru, and Greg  Nicholas. 
2009.  Classifying Turn -Level Uncertainty Using 
Word-Level Pro sody.  Proceedings Interspeech, 
Brighton, UK, September. 
Kate Forbes-Riley and  Diane Litman. 2011.  Benefits 
and Challenges of Real -Time Uncertainty Detection 
and Adaptation in a Spoken Dialogue Computer T u-
tor.  Speech Communication, in press. 
Diane J. Litman and Scott  Silliman. 2004. Itspoke: An 
intelligent tutoring spoken dialogue sys tem. In 
HLT/NAACL. 
Antoine Raux and Maxine Eskenazi. 2009. A ﬁnite-state 
turn-taking model for spoken dialog systems. In 
Proc. NAACL/HLT 2009, Boulder, CO, USA. 
Ethan O. Selfridge and Peter  A. Heeman. 2010. Impo r-
tance-Driven Turn -Bidding for spoken dialogue sy s-
tems. In  Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of 
the A ssociation for Computational Linguistics  (ACL 
'10). Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 177-185. 
Nigel Ward, Anais Rivera, Karen Ward, and David  G. 
Novick. 2005. Root causes of lost time and user 
stress in a simple dialog system. In Proceedings of 
Interspeech. 
 
 
98