=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Real-time reactive speech synthesis: incorporating interruptions
Mirjam Wester, David A. Braude, Blaise Potard, Matthew P . Aylett, Francesca Shaw
CereProc Ltd., Edinburgh, UK
{mirjam,dave,blaise,matthewa,francesca}@cereproc.com
Abstract
The ability to be interrupted and react in a realistic manner is a
key requirement for interactive speech interfaces. While previ-
ous systems have long implemented techniques such as ‘barge
in’ where speech output can be halted at word or phrase bound-
aries, less work has explored how to mimic human speech out-
put responses to real-time events like interruptions which re-
quire a reaction from the system. Unlike previous work which
has focused on incremental production, here we explore a novel
re-planning approach. The proposed system is versatile and of-
fers a large range of possible ways to react. A focus group
was used to evaluate the approach, where participants interacted
with a system reading out a text. The system would react to
audio interruptions, either with no reactions, passive reactions,
or active negative reactions (i.e. getting increasingly irritated).
Participants preferred a reactive system.
Index Terms: speech synthesis, reactive, interruption
1. Introduction
“Situated Interaction”, the theme of Interspeech 2017 is ad-
dressed in this paper from a synthesis perspective. Being able to
react in a realistic manner is a key requirement for an interactive
speech synthesis system. There are situations when the output
of a speech synthesis system (virtual agent) needs to be inter-
rupted, for example, when a noise event occurs (banging door,
passing train, or other environmental noises) that make it un-
likely that the user will be able to understand the synthesis. Ad-
ditionally, there will be times when the user wants to interrupt
the system. While previous systems have long implemented
techniques such as ‘barge in’ where speech output can be halted
at word or phrase boundaries, less work has explored how to
mimic human speech output responses to real-time events like
interruptions at which point the system is expected to react, ide-
ally in a convincingly authentic manner.
There is an implicit assumption that reactive synthesis has
to be incremental. This is not the case, it just needs to be stop-
pable. To be reactive, the synthesis has to be fast enough to
re-plan content (re-planning) and insert it (splicing). It is true
that incremental systems offer locations for insertion but, given
that any system has full timings described, such insertion points
can be chosen without the need for incremental generation.
In contrast, there are clear examples where incremental sys-
tems are required for example synthesising typed text as the user
is typing it [1] or performative synthesis where the interruption
rate can be seen as being continuous and focussed on spectral
and duration properties rather than linguistic context [2]. In this
work, we are focussed on producing a system that can allow a
conversational agent the ability to react rapidly and naturally to
external interruptions and stimuli. Therefore, we present a sys-
tem that incorporates re-planning as a strategy for dealing with
user-initiated interruptions.
We created a demonstration of ‘Reactive Synthesis’ for the
British Science Museum Lates in London (March 2017) as an
educational tool to provide a general introduction to speech
technology. Prior to the presentation at the museum, we were
interested in obtaining feedback from the general public as to
their opinions and attitudes to speech synthesis in general and
to the demo more speciﬁcally. The approach we took in this
work was to evaluate by means of a focus group. This paper de-
scribes the ‘Reactive Synthesis’ demo and how the focus group
responded to it. The contributions of this paper are:
• Clarifying the relationship between incremental processing,
re-planning and splicing.
• A novel approach using low-level audio splicing to imple-
ment re-planning.
• Design guidelines – what needs to be taken into account when
designing a reactive speech synthesis system.
• Exploring a new way of evaluating a system in a reactive and
interactive setting.
1.1. Previous work
Most previous reactive speech synthesis work falls under the
umbrella of incremental speech synthesis (iSS) in the context of
spoken dialogue systems. We argue, however, that the studies
have typically used a mixture of re-planning and incremental
planning, and that for many of the systems the term incremental
is slightly misconstrued.
Edlund [3] describes speciﬁc requirements that incremental
speech synthesis should meet for use in spoken dialogue sys-
tems. A system needs to be responsive and ﬂexible like human
interlocutors and it needs to process information incrementally
and continuously rather than in large chunks. To achieve this,
the synthesis must know what has been said, must be able to
halt, then continue/break as well as be able to stop. Further-
more, it must be real-time and online. Baumann et al. [4] ex-
pand on this by adding that the synthesis should be able to be-
gin speaking before utterance processing has ﬁnished; it should
make edits to (as-yet unspoken) parts of the utterance and adap-
tations of delivery parameters such as speaking rate or pitch
should be possible.
The processing paradigm deployed in inproTK [4] is one
where processing takes place just-in-time. The processing steps
are taken as late as possible to avoid re-processing when as-
sumptions change. [5] extend the work of [4] and integrate in-
cremental natural language generation (NLG) and speech syn-
thesis and demonstrate the ﬂexibility that an incremental ap-
proach to output generation for speech systems offers by im-
plementing a system that can repair understanding problems.
[5] found, in their system, that incremental output generation
was able to greatly speed up system response time. Further-
more, the behaviour of their fully incremental and adaptive sys-
tem was perceived as signiﬁcantly more human-like than the
non-incremental but responsive baseline systems. However, we
would argue this is due to the responsiveness of the system
Copyright © 2017 ISCA
INTERSPEECH 2017
August 20–24, 2017, Stockholm, Sweden
http://dx.doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2017-12503996

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
and not the incremental nature of the processing; the adapta-
tion strategy does not require incremental speech synthesis. It
is not that incremental processing is irrelevant, just that it is an
engineering solution to allow re-planning for slower systems.
Replanning is still a requirement for reactiveness.
Astrinaki et al. [2] do not approach the issue of incremental
speech synthesis from a spoken dialogue perspective but rather
from a performative and context-reactive perspective. Their
performative HTS system is reactive and allows for changes to
the pitch and tempo of upcoming phonemes. A lookahead of
only a few phones is sufﬁcient to achieve speech quality indis-
tinguishable from a regular system. Although [5] argues as the
pHTS system is fed from a (non-incrementally produced) label
ﬁle, it cannot easily be used in an incremental system. We ar-
gue that what [5] is referring to as incremental is in actual fact
re-planning. Changes to the label ﬁle are not what deﬁnes the
incremental nature of a system. We argue that the system de-
scribed in [2] is precisely incremental because the interruption
rate can be seen as being continuous and focussed on spectral
and duration properties rather than linguistic context not despite
it. There is no reason re-planning cannot be introduced to cover
the responsiveness of the system at a linguistic level.
In contrast, Pouget et al. [1] describes a scenario where
speech synthesis needs to be produced while the user is still in
the process of typing. In this scenario re-planning is difﬁcult to
carry out as the system would have to guess the intentions of the
user. Therefore incremental synthesis, as a strategy for online
estimation of the target prosody from an incomplete sentence,
is required.
To summarize, incremental approaches are required in
some scenarios, they also can greatly reduce latency which im-
proves responsiveness. However, re-planning is sufﬁcient if
synthesis can be carried out fast enough, and if re-planned au-
dio can seamlessly replace output audio before it has to be sent
to the output device.
2. System description
The re-planning and splicing approach is as follows: given a re-
quired latency, e.g. 200 ms, the system must operate fast enough
to resynthesise the current chunk of speech with an alternative
ending within that time. The initial part of the synthesis must
match exactly the initial part of the current chunk. The new
audio can then be seamlessly re-splicing into the audio stream
replacing the original planned output. This requires tight con-
trol of audio playback, but has the advantage of being agnostic
to the type of synthesis system you are using.
CereProc’s SDK [6] synthesises on a phrase-by-phrase ba-
sis, ﬁring a callback between phrases. During the callback a
special audio buffer is available which contains the audio of the
phrase as well as some metadata, this buffer is queued for play-
back. We created new functionality in the SDK that takes as
input one of these buffers, a minimum interruption time,tr, and
an interruption type, and returns a new buffer. In this buffer
the audio up to tr is guaranteed to be identical to the original
buffer. After that it will be interrupted at ti≥ tr. ti will be a
natural point for interruption, i.e. a syllable nucleus or bound-
ary. Once this buffer is available the agent can seamlessly swap
the audio buffer that is being played at some point ts < t r. By
setting this time slightly in the future of when the interruption
is needed some latency for processing can be added. This is
illustrated diagrammatically in Figure 1.
Depending on the call the system has multiple strategies for
ﬁnishing the phrase:
Played audio
Dropped audio
Audio generated for
smooth splicing
Audio generated
after interruption
with Lombard eﬀects
Legend
and of having nothing to do
once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading
but it had no pictures or conversations in it
‘and what is the use of a book,’
...
Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank
Audio Buﬀer Play Queue 
once or twice she had peeped into the book
Stop interrupting me!
but it had no pictures or conversations in it
her sister was reading
Interruption detected t0
Interruption requested for tr
Audio buﬀer swapped ts
Start of modiﬁcation ti
New buﬀer received
Estimated
maximum
 latency
Figure 1: Example of the use of the interruption API, showing
the changes in audio buffers. Final played audio is in blue and
orange boxes, red and grey boxes are dropped. Note thattr−t0
must be larger than the maximum system latency.
• stopping immediately,
• tailing off over a few words (a polite turn pass),
• adding Lombard effects for a few words (an angry turn pass),
• completing the original phrase with Lombard effects added.
The system can then add additional speech before returning
to the original queue if appropriate. Otherwise it may need to
drop some phrases that have been resynthesised differently, or
empty the queue entirely, depending on the application.
2.1. Demo set-up
As the demonstrator was intended for a science exhibit (the
British Science Museum Lates), and more speciﬁcally to pro-
vide a general introduction to speech technology to the gen-
eral public, the voice of the system was chosen for its clar-
ity and apparent patience. The text to be read is a gen-
eral introduction about speech synthesis, which is available
online: http://derstandard.at/1325485448039/
Talking-Technology.
It is well known that combining speech synthesis with a
strong visual modality has the side effect of reducing the over-
all impact of the audio modality. To maximise the impact of the
speech synthesis, the visual aspects of the system were thus kept
to a minimum, and only displays the text and the current posi-
tion within it, and a basic interface reﬂecting its internal state
(see Figure 2).
Rather than an exhaustive study of the whole range of pos-
sible reactions to interruptions, we selected a small subset in
order to simulate three distinct system reaction styles.
• First, a baseline system that simply did not react whatso-
ever when the user attempted to interrupt, it simply continued
reading.
3997

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Figure 2: Visualisation of the system in action. The bar at the
top (and the ﬁgure in the centre) indicates the system’s mood.
The text being read is displayed at the bottom, with the current
word being read highlighted. When an interruption occurs, the
background colour is modiﬁed and an explicit dialogue window
is displayed.
• The second system demonstrated a basic reactive system: it
detected user interruptions and stopped its speech gracefully,
almost instantly. It then waited for the user to stop speaking
before resuming the reading task.
• The third system was intended to demonstrate a more com-
plex behaviour of the system: it initially reacted gracefully
to users’ interruptions, but as the interactions continued, the
type of reactions evolved to demonstrate an increased level of
irritation of the system when interrupted. After about 10 in-
terruptions, the system simply decided it had had enough and
it would leave the interaction.
For the demo, V oice Activation only was used to detect in-
terruptions. No linguistic or recognition processing was carried
out. More speciﬁcally, the system used a V oice Activity De-
tection (V AD) module [7] to detect speech-based interruptions
from the user. The system did not distinguish between speech
feedback from the user or actual voluntary interruptions, con-
sidering any event that triggered an active state of the V AD
module as an interruption. When an interruption was detected,
a reaction was generated, comprising 5 stages:
1. Modify the currently playing phrase to surrender the ﬂoor to
the user as described above; normally stopping at a natural
point or tailing off politely (maximum latency is 50 ms).
2. Pause to let the user speak; the system would stay silent until
a silence of at least 200 ms long was detected.
3. Generate a reaction from the system about the interruption
that had just happened. At the beginning of the interac-
tion, reactions were rather polite and invited the user to carry
on speaking, but as the interaction progressed the reactions
turned into vocal gestures, and in the ﬁnal phase clearly irri-
tated remarks.
4. Optionally pause to let the user express him/herself; the du-
ration of the pause becomes shorter as the system becomes
more irritated.
5. Resume the reading task.
In practice, all three systems were built the same way, sim-
ply disabling some of the functionalities of the “full” system:
• The ﬁrst system had the V AD module disabled
• The second system had its mood change disabled, and always
performed the most polite of reactions
3. Evaluation
There is no established approach to evaluating the effectiveness
of reactive synthesis. Many studies look at the quality or natu-
ralness of the output synthetic speech after applying incremen-
tal processing compared to a standard non-incremental version
of their system [1, 2]. However, in such cases the responsive-
ness of the synthetic speech is not considered in the evaluation.
In [5], an evaluation was carried out in which subjects were
asked to rate the behaviour of a system. The samples presented
were interrupted by noise, to which the system did or did not
react. The reactive system was rated considerably more human-
like. However, [8]’s multi-modal evaluation experiment illus-
trated that users not only rate formulations that are enabled by
incremental speech synthesis higher, but also judge such a sys-
tem’s synthesis quality as higher, despite the fact that it was ac-
tually worse than non-incremental synthesis. This result high-
lights that pure listening evaluations may be inadequate and that
evaluation in context may lead to more relevant judgements.
Our system of re-planning and splicing has not yet been in-
corporated in a truly relevant, meaningful context as it is still at
a development stage. Rather than try and obtain judgements on
naturalness and quality of the synthetic speech we were inter-
ested in obtaining feedback from the general public on a higher
level regarding their opinions and attitudes to speech synthesis
in general and to the ‘reactive synthesis’ demo created for ed-
ucational purposes more speciﬁcally. The approach we took to
evaluation was by means of a focus group.
3.1. Focus Group
In setting up the focus group we followed the Guidelines for
Conducting a Focus Group [9]. In addition to the ‘Reactive
Synthesis’ demo there was another demo ‘Bot or Not’ which
had also been designed for the Science Museum Lates. All the
various stages in the focus group meeting are described below.
However in terms of feedback we only present responses rel-
evant to the ‘Reactive Synthesis’ demo. Six people (3M/3F)
were selected to take part in the focus group. They were re-
cruited through the Edinburgh University Careers Service My-
CareerHub. The only requirements were that the participants
were able to speak English to a native level and were able to
attend the meeting.
Two facilitators ran the focus group meeting. The meeting
included the following stages:
3998

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
• Welcome to participants – ﬁlling in of consent forms.
• Playing with interactive (speech technology related) toys.
• Filling in of a general speech synthesis questionnaire.
• The ﬁrst demo ‘Bot or Not’ was carried out in pairs .
• Group conversation discussing the interactive toys and ‘Bot
or Not’.
• ‘Reactive Synthesis’ demo was run in three different ways.
1. System talked – no reaction to interruptions at all.
2. System stopped talking when interrupted – then contin-
ued.
3. System stopped talking and reacted every time it was
interrupted – reactions started polite and ramped up a
step each interruption until very irritated.
• Group conversation discussing the reactive synthesis demo.
• End of focus group meeting - subjects thanked and remuner-
ated for their time and effort.
3.2. Feedback on reactive synthesis demo
The goal of the focus group meeting was to get a more gen-
eral, higher level of input from people who may have previ-
ously not considered speech synthesis. One of the ﬁrst strik-
ing elements that became clear during the discussions and when
considering the responses of the participants (P) to the speech
synthesis questionnaire was that speech recognition and speech
understanding were seen as part and parcel of speech synthe-
sis, for example answers to the questions “Do you use synthetic
speech? If no, why not?” included:
P3:“I’d be worried I’d ﬁnd because I talk fast and with a broad
Scottish accent, I’d not get understood. ”
P4. “I ﬁnd it’s too laborious and time-consuming. You have to
repeat yourself over and over irritating. ”
The gist of the feedback that was given after the reactive
synthesis had been demonstrated was that overall participants
preferred the reactive mode over the non-reactive. And of the
two reactive modes they preferred the more simple approach,
in which the system stopped when interrupted and when it re-
sumed it went back and repeated the spurt1 it was interrupted in.
Furthermore, there was agreement that emotion is not the point
of synthetic speech and that strong emotions get in the way of
efﬁciency. A few of the participants’ quotes that illustrate the
above summary:
P3: “The second seemed the most appropriate for most situa-
tions, given that the third one is it’s great that it’s maybe more
emotion, but it’s often not going to react in exactly the right way,
and getting that is so difﬁcult”
P1: “I agree that the second version is best, cause it’s reactive
but it doesn’t get in the way. ”
P4: “I quite like the other one actually (the third one), the fact
that it kind of spoke back with you. Maybe, like, it being a bit
sassy was a bit not appropriate at the time, but I think I’d quite
like that to have on my phone. ”
P6: “If it’s personable it’s ﬁne, but if it’s angry then probably
not. ”
Some of the participants also mentioned that they had been
concentrating more on how the synthesis sounded in the demo
1A spurt is a section of speech with silence before and after it. The
silence can be very short (as little as 20 ms). The CereProc spurt is a
modiﬁed version of spurt as deﬁned by Shriberg [10].
rather than paying attention to the interface and the interrup-
tions.
P3: “cause I was listening to the voice and him getting more
annoyed, I didn’t notice that there was a bar of increasingly,
like, one end was thunderstorm and one was happy, right?”
P1: “I didn’t notice the face or anything because I was trying to
work out, well what is good and what’s bad about this voice. ”
Furthermore, they mentioned they had never given reactive
speech synthesis any thought nor ever dealt with it.
P1: “I’ve probably never dealt with reactionary stuff before so
perhaps the fact that it’s stopping, I don’t know quite how to
judge what is good and what is bad”
Finally, the focus group liked the idea of synthesis as an aid
in human-human conversation rather than an interference.
P5: “It could be used in a lecture type setting. ”
P2: “like it could work with a lecturer or somebody as opposed
to in place of them. Yeah I think that’s a good idea. ”
4. Discussion
The focus group gave some useful feedback regarding reactive
synthesis, and a renewed perspective of a what a group of peo-
ple from the general public think about speech synthesis. In our
focus group, participants had not previously come across reac-
tive speech synthesis. Their ﬁrst reaction –objecting to the sys-
tem being annoyed– makes sense as they assumed the system
should be cooperative. However, having annoyed or obstructive
agents has a clear use case in a virtual environment for games
or training purposes. These are types of use cases that people
have yet to really come across.
We have discussed the relationship between incremental
processing, re-planning and splicing. It should be clear that
we consider reactiveness to depend on being able to re-plan the
output of a synthesis system and splice it in at the right time.
Incremental speech synthesis can be seen as a way of speeding
up processing, but is not sufﬁcient to achieve a reactive sys-
tem. This leads to the following design guidelines for a reactive
speech synthesis system:
1. Fast enough Whatever the chunk is (utterance, phrase, etc)
the system must be able to synthesise replacement chunk
within the required latency (we would suggest 200 ms as a
minimum). For example, in our system where the chunk is a
spurt (or intonational phrase) and 95% are less than 1850 ms
for a 200 ms latency the system has to be at least 10x real-
time.
2. Splice audio in You need to be able to tightly control audio
output, i.e. be able to alter queued audio while it is waiting to
be played and to know almost exactly what audio has been
played. For multi-modal systems this would extend to the
video output as well.
3. Know how to respond The appropriate response to an in-
terruption varies considerably by application, as we found in
our focus group, helpful systems should pause politely and
rephrase, however for virtual characters a whole set of hu-
man responses to interruptions including rudely continuing
may need to be implemented.
5. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under grant agree-
ment No 645378 (Aria V ALUSPA).
3999

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
6. References
[1] M. Pouget, T. Hueber, G. Bailly, and T. Baumann, “HMM training
strategy for incremental speech synthesis,” in Interspeech, 2015,
pp. 1201–1205.
[2] M. Astrinaki, N. d’Alessandro, B. Picart, T. Drugman, and T. Du-
toit, “Reactive and continuous control of HMM-based speech syn-
thesis,” in IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT) ,
2012, pp. 252–257.
[3] J. Edlund, “Incremental speech synthesis,” in Second Swedish
Language Technology Conference, 2008, pp. 53–54.
[4] T. Baumann and D. Schlangen, “INPRO iSS: A component for
just-in-time incremental speech synthesis,” in ACL 2012 System
Demonstrations, 2012, pp. 103–108.
[5] H. Buschmeier, T. Baumann, B. Dosch, S. Kopp, and
D. Schlangen, “Combining incremental language generation and
incremental speech synthesis for adaptive information presenta-
tion,” in 13th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on
Discourse and Dialogue, 2012, pp. 295–303.
[6] M. P. Aylett and C. J. Pidcock, “The Cerevoice characterful speech
synthesiser SDK,” in Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA) , 2007, pp.
413–414.
[7] A. Bergkvist, C. Jennings, D. C. Burnett, A. Narayanan,
and B. Aboba, WebRTC 1.0: Real-time Communication
Between Browsers . W3C, 2012–2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.w3.org/TR/webrtc/
[8] T. Baumann and D. Schlangen, “Interactional adequacy as a fac-
tor in the perception of synthesized speech,” in 8th ISCA Speech
Synthesis Workshop, 2013.
[9] “Guidelines for conducting a focus group,” https://assessment.
trinity.duke.edu/documents/How
to Conduct a Focus Group.
pdf, 2005, accessed: 2017-03-01.
[10] E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke, and D. Baron, “Observations on overlap:
ﬁndings and implications for automatic processing of multi-party
conversation.” inInterspeech, 2001, pp. 1359–1362.
4000