=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Interruption Handling for Conversational Robots
Shiye Cao ∗1, Jiwon Moon ∗1, Amama Mahmood 1, Victor Nikhil Antony 1,
Ziang Xiao 1, Anqi Liu 1, and Chien-Ming Huang 1
∗Equal Contribution 1Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, 21218, USA
{scao14, jmoon47, amama.mahmood, vantony1, ziang.xiao, aliu.cs, chienming.huang }@jhu.edu
Cooperative agreement
R: [Fantastic]
P: [That's a good idea]
R: En. The overcoat is now on our list. 
     How about a ﬂashlight next? 
     It provides 24-hour signaling capability 
     and can be used for various purposes.
Participant clicked to add overcoat to the list R: An air map could be useful for 
     navigation, but without a compass, 
     it might be challenging to use 
     effectively. 
     [I still think a]
P: [can't we use the stars to track?]
R: Yes, you can use the stars to 
     navigate at night. It requires some 
     knowledge of constellations...
Cooperative clariﬁcation Disruptive interruption
R: [You seem stressed!]
P: [45 caliber.]                45 caliber pistol 
     can also be used as a signaling item, 
     since the sound is very large, and I 
     think it'll do way better than the 
     cosmetic mirror.
R: Let me ﬁnish my thought. Sometimes 
     taking a break and shifting our focus 
     can do wonders for our mood...
Line Line Line
Fig. 1. We present an interruption handling system that classifies user-initiated interruptions into 1) cooperative agreement, 2) cooperative assistance, 3)
cooperative clarification, and 4) disruptive interruption and adapts different strategies to handle the interruptions accordingly. This figure illustrates how the
system responded to three user-initiated interruptions using different handling strategies (see Fig. 3 for details). We highlight overlapping speech in blue. “R”
denotes robot and “P” denotes participant. Participants’ consent was obtained for images in this publication.
Abstract—Interruptions, a fundamental component of human
communication, can enhance the dynamics and effectiveness of
conversations, but only when effectively managed by all parties
involved. Despite advancements in robotic systems, state-of-the-
art systems still have limited capabilities in handling user-
initiated interruptions in real-time. Prior research has primarily
focused on post hoc analysis of interruptions. To address this
gap, we present a system that detects user-initiated interruptions
and manages them in real-time based on the interrupter’s intent
(i.e., cooperative agreement, cooperative assistance, cooperative
clarification, or disruptive interruption). The system was de-
signed based on interaction patterns identified from human-
human interaction data. We integrated our system into an LLM-
powered social robot and validated its effectiveness through a
timed decision-making task and a contentious discussion task
with 21 participants. Our system successfully handled 93.69%
(n=104/111) of user-initiated interruptions. We discuss our learn-
ings and their implications for designing interruption-handling
behaviors in conversational robots.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Robots are envisioned to become assistants, teammates, and
companions in people’s everyday lives, capable of taking on
complex social and physical tasks. To achieve effective and
intuitive human-robot interaction (HRI), it is crucial that robots
possess natural conversation capabilities [20].
Interruptions—occurring when a listener attempts to take
the floor before the speaker’s utterance is complete—are a fun-
damental aspect of human communication [8]. Interruptions
can be used to signal understanding ( cooperative agreement),
assist the speaker ( cooperative assistance ), seek clarification
when needed ( cooperative clarification), or express disagree-
ment and shift the topic ( disruptive) [23], leading to more
fluid and fast-paced conversations when effectively used and
handled. However, interruptions can disrupt the flow of the
conversation, potentially leading to conversation breakdowns
and the interrupter feeling excluded if addressed inadequately.
Thus, it is critical for conversational robots to be able to detect
and manage interruptions on-the-fly [23].
Humans are naturally adept at handling interruptions, but
state-of-the-art conversational robots, which have only recently
shifted from scripted to more natural interactions, still lack
the ability to handle user-initiated interruptions effectively.
Existing spoken dialogue systems mostly rely on explicit turn-
taking signaling ( e.g., push-to-talk mechanism [6] and wake-
words [22]) to detect user-initiated interruptions. Moreover,
existing systems are designed to always yield the speaker
turn immediately after an interruption is detected [7]. Previous
work emphasizes the importance of classifying the intent of
the interrupter to enable the system to respond accordingly to
the interruption to allow more natural and fluid conversations
[24, 19]. Towards this goal, studies have explored the use of
multi-modal inputs (i.e., , acoustic features, facial expressions,
and head movements) to classify interruptions as either co-
operative or disruptive during post hoc analysis of human-
human conversation data [24]. However, to the best of our
knowledge, no existing robotic system has integrated intention
arXiv:2501.01568v2  [cs.HC]  26 Apr 2025

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
classification into its interruption-handling framework, and
little work has explored how conversational robots should
manage different types of interruptions. When should robots
yield to users? When should robots hold their turn?
As a first step towards answering these questions, in this
work, we designed an interruption-handling system based on
interaction patterns identified from human-human interaction
data. We integrated our interruption handling system into a
social robot and showed that our system can successfully
handle 93.69% of user-initiated interruptions ( e.g., Fig. 1) in
timed decision-making and contentious discussion tasks.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Interruptions in Human-Human Interaction
Interruptions occur when a listener tries to take the floor
before the speaker’s utterance is complete [8]. They are a com-
mon aspect of human conversations and can occur more than
once per minute in dyadic [21] and group conversations [14].
While most interruptions involve overlapping speech, brief
overlapping speech that does not purloin the speaker’s floor—
such as during speaker exchanges [10] or verbal backchannels
(conversation continuers signaling attention, understanding,
and agreement, such as “uh-huh” or “yeah”) [18]—is not
considered an interruption. Interruptions can be categorized
as cooperative or disruptive based on the intention of the
interrupter [9]. Cooperative interruptions are intended to aid
the completion of the current turn by expressing concurrence
or understanding ( cooperative agreement ), providing a word
or idea that the speaker may need ( cooperative assistance), or
asking the speaker to clarify or elaborate on previous informa-
tion ( cooperative clarification) [13]. Disruptive interruptions
occur when the listener challenges the speaker’s control and
disrupts the conversational flow to express an opposing opinion
(disagreement), further develop the current topic (floor taking),
change the subject ( topic change), or summarize the speaker’s
point to end the turn and avoid unwanted information ( tangen-
tialization) [13]. Prior work found that the type and frequency
of interruptions are shaped by the conversational and power
dynamics of interaction [3]. However, limited work inves-
tigated how humans handle interruptions in conversations.
Hence, in this work, we analyzed human-human conversations
with varying power dynamics between speakers to understand
how people handle different types of interruptions.
B. Interruptions in Human-Agent Interaction
Existing conversational robots have very limited capabilities
in handling interruptions. Many systems ignore overlapping
speech altogether (e.g., [1]), while others treat any overlapping
speech as interruption ( e.g., [4]) or rely on designed explicit
turn-taking signaling ( e.g., user touches the robot’s head [6])
to detect user-initiated interruptions. Popular commercial voice
assistants take a step further by relying on wakewords ( e.g.,
“Alexa”) to detect user-initiated interruptions [16]. However,
these approaches remain error-prone due to their rigidity (may
mistake ambient microphone noise as interruption [8] and rely
on users to remember the wakeword [15]), and are unnatural
in human conversations. Recent advances, such as Alexa’s
follow-up mode and Siri’s ability to handle back-to-back
requests, though limited, reflect ongoing efforts to improve
the fluidity of the conversation. However, these systems still
struggle with managing complex, multi-turn interruptions [15],
yielding the floor to all interruptions equally without assessing
intent. Prior work in human-agent interaction recommended
distinguishing between cooperative and disruptive interrup-
tions to help determine how the agent should deal with the
interruption [19]. Multi-modal features ( i.e., acoustic profiles,
head activity, gaze behavior, lexical features, and facial expres-
sions) have been used to automatically classify interruptions as
cooperative or competitive [24]. However, prior efforts for han-
dling these cooperative and disruptive interruptions have been
limited to post hoc evaluation of a dataset [8]; to the best of
our knowledge, no existing conversational agent has the ability
to handle user-initiated interruptions based on the context of
the interruption in real-time. In this work, we leverage natural
language understanding capabilities of large language models
(LLMs) to classify and handle user-initiated interruptions in
real-time. By categorizing interruptions into four finer-grained
categories—cooperative agreement, assistance, clarification,
and disruptive—our system tailors handling strategies to match
the context and user intention behind the interruption.
III. I NTERRUPTION HANDLING IN HUMAN INTERACTION
In HRI, robot behaviors are often designed based on human
behavior patterns observed in human-human interaction ( e.g.,
[2, 11]), as this can make robot behavior feel more natural and
align better with user expectations. However, there is limited
prior research on interruption handling in both human-robot
and human-human interaction, providing little guidance for
designing conversational robots. To address this, we analyzed
natural human conversations to identify human behavior pat-
terns when handling interruptions.
A. Human Conversational Data
As the frequency and type of interruption correlate with
power dynamics in conversations [3], we selected the top five
YouTube videos for three categories of conversations with
varying power dynamics, filtered by view count and duration
(4–20 minutes), resulting in 246 interruptions.
• Discussions (nD = 106 interruptions) represent casual
settings with no clear power dynamics. We analyzed two
dyadic conversations and three multi-party discussions.
• Talk show interviews (nT = 122 interruptions) rep-
resent casual settings with moderate power dynamics,
exemplified by clips from The Tonight Show Starring
Jimmy Fallon. While the interviewer can control the
conversation, they typically refrain due to the low-stakes
nature.
• Press briefings (nP = 18 interruptions) featuring former
U.S. White House press secretary Jen Psaki are high-
stakes settings where the speaker holds significant power,
controlling the narrative.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Handling StrategiesInterruption
 Types
Cooperative
agreement
Hold floor
Cooperative
assistance
Cooperative
clarification
orDisruptive
interruption
or Yield
Ignore
 Cont.
Strong
hold
Ack
 Cont.
Repeat
Ack
 Cont.
Ack
 Cont. or
 Yield
Listen
Ack
 Cont. or
 Yield
Listen
Ack
 Answer
 Cont. or
 Yield
Fig. 2. Interaction patterns of interruption handling in human conversations.
The highlighted strategies were implemented in our system (Fig. 3). “Ack”
denotes acknowledge and “Cont.” denotes continue.
B. Analysis
Informed by the taxonomy of interruption types from prior
work and research highlighting the need to tailor interruption
handling to the intention (type) of the interruption (detailed
in Section II-A), we coded the videos for 1) intention of the
interrupter—either cooperative ( i.e., agreement, assistance, or
clarification) or disruptive—and 2) the strategy individuals use
to manage interruptions—yield or hold the floor. Our goal
was to identify interaction patterns that reveal how humans
handle different types of interruptions. Interaction patterns
were created based on the sequence of these two states.
One coder transcribed and coded the interruptions, while a
secondary coder independently coded 10% to assess inter-
coder reliability (Cohen’s Kappa = 1).
C. Interaction Patterns
We identified the following interaction patterns (Fig. 2):
1) Cooperative: agreement → hold floor: When speakers
encountered cooperative agreement, they typically acknowl-
edged the interruption and continued speaking ( nD = 26 ,
nT = 48 , nP = 2 ). A deviation from this pattern was noted
in only one case, where the speaker yielded the floor to the
interrupter upon agreement during a discussion ( nD = 1).
2) Cooperative: assistance → hold floor: When the inter-
rupter offered assistance, the speaker typically acknowledged
it, briefly paused for the interrupter to finish (usually a few
words), then resumed speaking ( nD = 7 , nT = 10 ). A
deviation occurred a few times, where the speaker yielded the
floor to the interrupter ( nD = 4, nT = 2).
3) Cooperative: clarification → hold floor or yield: When
the interrupter sought clarification, the speaker typically ac-
knowledged the question, paused for the interrupter to finish,
answered, and then resumed their original thought ( nD = 5 ,
nT = 8 , nP = 1 ). However, in contentious discussions, the
speaker sometimes yielded the floor (nD = 3, nP = 1), show-
ing that clarifying questions can be used to assert alternative
points and take control of the floor from the speaker.
4) Disruptive → hold floor or yield: Disruptive interrup-
tions were the most common (130 of 246) and showed
different patterns across tasks. Speakers either held the floor
(nD = 19 , nT = 37 , nP = 7 ) or yielded it ( nD = 41 ,
nT = 17 , nP = 7 ). In debates, speakers often yielded
due to the polarized nature of the discussions, while in less
polarized settings (talk shows) they typically held the floor,
where disruptive interruptions can be more acceptable.
We identified three strategies speakers used to hold the
floor: 1) ignore the interruption and continue speaking, 2)
acknowledge the interruption while implicitly signaling intent
to retain floor by repeating a few words spoken at the time
of interruption and continue speaking, and 3) explicitly state
intent to continue ( e.g., “Let me finish my thought” ) and
then continue speaking. The first two strategies were more
common for mild interruptions later in the speaker’s turn, after
part of their message had been conveyed. The third strategy
was used by the speaker to defend their turn from more
aggressive disruptive interruptions (e.g., disruptive interruption
early in their turn or repeated interruption attempts). In multi-
party discussions, other participants sometimes intervened to
protect the speaker’s turn during such aggressive interruptions.
Speaker acknowledgments to interruptions were mostly non-
verbal (i.e., nods and mutual gaze). Verbal acknowledgements
(e.g., “sure” or “yeah”) occurred in only 13 cases. Similar to
prior work [2], speakers averted gaze to hold floor, and held
prolonged mutual gaze until interrupter took over to yield floor.
We used these interaction patterns to guide the design of
our interruption handling system for conversational robots.
IV. I NTERRUPTION HANDLING SYSTEM FOR
CONVERSATIONAL ROBOTS
Our interruption handling system has three main modules:
interruption detection, intent classification, and interruption
handling. Fig. 3 illustrates how user input flows through
it. We provide an example implementation of our system
integrated into an LLM-powered social robot built on Platform
for Situation Intelligence ( \psi)1.
A. User-Initiated Interruptions Detection
We detect interruptions by monitoring for simultaneous
speech. As overlapping speech towards the end of turn is
common during speaker floor exchanges and is not considered
an interruption [10]. So, if at the time of the overlapping
speech, the robot has less than two seconds of planned
speech left, the system simply ignores it and “finish-up” (Line
4 ). Verbal backchannels are also not considered interruptions;
however, distinguishing between verbal backchannel and short
interruption (e.g., “No”) requires identifying the intent of the
interrupter, detailed in the next section.
1 Supplemental materials (contains additional implementation details):
https://intuitivecomputing.github.io/publications/2025-rss-cao-supp.pdf.
Code: https://github.com/intuitivecomputing/interruption-handling-system.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Is robot
talking?
Is user
talking?
Is wake
word 
used?
Stop
robot
speech
NN
Is robot
planned
speech
left < 2 s
Y
N
Intent
classification
yield
immediately
finish-up
Generate
new
behavior
Finish
planned
behavior
Generate
new
behavior
Generate
new
behavior
Is <5s
since start
of robot turn
Is user
speech
1 or 2 words
Disruptive
interruptionY
Stop
robot
speech
yield immediately
Generate
new
behavior
N
Signal
Holding
floor
ack and wrap-up
Summarize
& finish
planned
behavior
Cooperative
agreement
Y
N
Repeat
last
phrase
continue
Finish
planned
behavior
Ack:
verbal &
nods
ack and continue
Repeat
last
phrase
Finish
planned
behavior
Cooperative
assistance
Ack:
verbal &
nods
ack and continue
Repeat
last
phrase
Finish
planned
behavior
Cooperative
clarification
Respond
to clarifying
question
Finish
planned
behavior
clarify and continue
Y
check Y Y
Fig. 3. Metro-map-inspired diagram of the interruption handling system, illustrating how user speech flows through the interruption detection, intent
classification, and interruption handling modules. It demonstrates how the system selects the handling strategy based on the predicted user intention given
overlapping speech between the user and the robot. We use “Line <color>” to refer to different interruption handling paths in the figure. “Ack” denotes
acknowledge and “Cont.” denotes continue.
Additionally, as users often prefer more control and pre-
dictability in human-agent interactions than human-human
interactions [5], we added support for explicit wakeword-
triggered interruptions. When wakeword ( i.e., the robot’s
name) or “stop” is heard as overlapping speech, the system
always yield immediately (Line 4 ).
B. Interrupter Intention Classification
In human communication, the speaker’s choice of inter-
ruption handling strategy depends on the intention of the
interrupter. So, we prompt-engineered a large language model
(GPT-4o-mini) to classify the intention of the interrupter into
cooperative agreement (includes backchannels), cooperative
assistance, cooperative clarification, and disruptive interruption
given the conversational history and the amount of time
elapsed in the turn since the robot started talking.
Both backchannels and cooperative agreements are used to
support the speaker by expressing attention, understanding,
and agreement. In this work, we differentiate them by overlap
length: short overlaps (one or two words) indicate backchan-
nels, while longer overlaps are cooperative agreements.
C. Interruption Handling
Following the interaction patterns identified in Section II-B,
the system adopts different interruption handling strategies
based on the predicted intention of the interrupter:
• Cooperative Agreement: If the cooperative agreement is
only one or two words, it is likely a verbal backchannel,
which the system disregards it and continues with the
remaining planned content from the last punctuation
mark ( continue, Line 4 ). If the cooperative agreement
contains more than two words, the system acknowledges
verbally (with “ya”, “yes”, “uhhum”, or “sure”), nods,
and then continues with the remaining planned content
(ack and continue , Line 4 ).
• Cooperative Assistance: The system acknowledges ver-
bally (with “yeah”, “yes”, or “thanks”), nods, and con-
tinues with the remaining planned content from the last
punctuation mark. ( ack and continue , Line 4 ).
• Cooperative Clarification: Cooperative clarifications are
handled by an LLM prompted to address the clarification
requested and then continue with the remaining previ-
ously planned content ( clarify and continue , Line 4 ).
• Disruptive Interruption: Disruptive interruptions occur-
ring within 5 seconds of the robot starting to speak
are considered aggressive disruptive interruptions by our
system. In such cases, an LLM is prompted to generate
behavior for the robot to express its intent to maintain
the turn ( e.g., “Let me finish my thought” in Fig. 1),
provide a summary of the remaining content, and then
yield (ack and wrap-up , Line 4 ). For milder disruptive

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
interruptions, the system yields the floor immediately and
a new robot response is generated based on the content
of the interruption ( yield immediately, Line 4 ).
V. E VALUATION STUDY: METHODOLOGY
We conducted a user study to validate our system by inte-
grating the interruption handling system into an LLM-powered
social robot. We implemented basic social robot interaction
behavior by hand-crafting a bank of facial expressions (happy,
satisfied, excited, interested, surprised, and thinking) and head
positions (left gaze, right gaze, look at screen, left nod, right
nod, thinking), idle behaviors, gaze aversion, and leveraged an
LLM (GPT-4o-2024-05-13) to generate contextualized robot
speech and select fitting facial expressions, head movements,
and task actions (additional details provided in supplemental
materials1 Section II).
A. Inducing User-Initiated Interruptions
To encourage user-initiated interruptions, we made the fol-
lowing design choices in our implementation:
1) Task: We contextualized our system in a timed decision-
making and a contentious discussion task, anticipating
that time pressure and controversy can encourage inter-
ruptions. In the decision-making task, participants had
five minutes to select seven out of fifteen items to help
them survive in a desert survival simulation. The robot
was instructed to persuade, rather than simply agree,
with users. A countdown timer was shown to add time
pressure. In the discussion task, participants prepared
for a 2-minute presentation on whether the federal gov-
ernment should abolish capital punishment. The robot
remained neutral until the participant clearly stated their
position, at which point it adopted an opposing stance
to encourage consideration of alternative perspective.
2) Robot persona : We designed the robot to have a fem-
inine name (“Luna”), a feminine voice (Google en-
US-Standard-H), gaze aversion while it is talking, and
generally positive facial expressions (see supplemental
materials1 Fig. 1). Prior research highlights that gender
significantly affects interruption patterns; women are
more likely to be interrupted than men, particularly when
they avoid direct eye contact with their conversation
partners [13]. Additionally, women tend to smile more
during conversations, which has been linked to a higher
likelihood of being interrupted [13].
3) Pre-programmed events : We designed two pre-
programmed events1 per task where the robot holds the
floor for roughly one minute to provoke user-initiated
interruptions. In event one, triggered at the start of
the discussion, the robot introduces itself and provides
disclaimers. In event two, triggered 3.5 minutes into
the discussion, the robot tells an unrelated fun story or
facts.
B. Study Procedure
We set up two cameras to record the participants’ interac-
tions with the robot from both the front-view and back-view
during the study (see Fig. 4). After providing consent, par-
ticipants completed a demographic questionnaire and watched
a 1-minute sample interaction video. They then engaged in
a practice task, designed to familiarize them with the robot,
answering four factual questions about space exploration.
Following the practice task, participants completed two tasks
(in random order) and completed a post-task questionnaire
after each task. The study concluded with a semi-structured
interview aimed to understand their overall experience working
with the robot and to collect feedback on robot interruption
handling.
C. Participants
We recruited 21 participants (11 female, 10 male), aged
18 to 30 (M= 22.38, SD= 3.58), through convenience sam-
pling from the local community via electronic newsletters
and mailing lists. Most participants had limited experience
using speech-based AI technology (M=2.81, SD=1.25, Min=1,
Max=5, 5-point Likert scale with 1 being no experience and
5 being extensive experience) and reported that they have
only used it for simple commands, i.e., setting alarms and
checking the weather. The study took roughly 45 minutes, and
participants were compensated at $15.00 per hour. The study
was approved by our institutional review board (IRB).
D. Metrics
We constructed two subjective scales (see supplemental ma-
terials1 Section III for details) from the post-task questionnaire
to explore how interruption handling might affect the user’s:
• Perceived inclusion in discussion (rating scale 1–5):
Three-item scale (Cronbach’s α = .78) measuring how
heard, respected, and valued users felt during the discus-
sion.
• Overall satisfaction with discussion (rating scale 1–5):
Nine-item scale (Cronbach’s α = .77) assessing user’s
enjoyment, learning, contentment with outcomes of the
discussion, and willingness to engage in future discus-
sions.
E. Coding
One coder transcribed all interactions and extracted con-
versation snippets with overlapping speech. For ground truth
and fine-grained understanding of interruptions, two coders
independently analyzed 100% of the interruptions, classifying
them by type (disruptive, cooperative agreement, assistance,
or clarification) and by attributes such as statement (opinion
or non-opinion), question (opinion or factual), or verbal back-
channel, and assessed whether each interruption was success-
fully addressed, meaning that the robot effectively responded
to the interrupter without causing a conversation breakdown.
Cohen’s kappa was0.92, and coders resolved conflicts through
discussion.

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
R: I see your point. In my opinion, 
     some people argue that knowing 
     the perpetrator has been executed 
     can bring a sense of finality and 
     justice. They believe it can help 
     families move forward by ensuring 
     the criminal cannot harm anyone 
     [else. However, I]
P: [O::h okay.] R: [I understand 
     that not]
P: [But (.) can you 
     give me] (1.5)
P: Can you give me, more like (.) 
     data? Like (.) has it actually 
     prevented, any like (.) is it 
     has it [worked as a deterrent?]
R: [Sure], Deterrence is the idea ...
Repeated “I”
1
1
Participant interrupted.
System classified user speech 
as cooperative agreement.
Robot stopped briefly and 
continued. Line
1
2 2
Participant interrupted.
System classified user speech 
as cooperative clarification.
2
Robot stopped and answered
the question. Line 3
3
R: That's a great question! In my opinion, 
    the data on whether capital punishment 
    acts as a deterrent is mixed. Some 
    studies suggest... Overall, the evidence 
    is inconclusive...
Speech overlapped.
Not a user-initiated 
interruption.
3
Robot generated new 
behavior (response). Line
Cut off planned speech
Because of the 1.5 s delay in 
participant speech, this was 
treated as a new question.
Fig. 4. Example conversation where the system handles various types of compounded interruptions. Overlap 3 is an example of a robot-initiated interruption.
We used the Jeffersonian transcription system [17]. “R” denotes robot and “P” denotes participant.
VI. E VALUATION STUDY: F INDINGS
We identified 121 user-initiated interruptions from 206.59
minutes of interaction data ( e.g., Fig. 4) involving 525 user
query-robot response pairs, or turns (decision-making: 312
turns, discussion: 213 turns). The timed decision-making task
(n = 86) had more than twice as many user-initiated interrup-
tions as the contentious discussion task ( n = 35).
A. The majority of interruption attempts were disruptive
Based on the interruption intent coded by the research team,
the most common type of interruption was disruptive ( n = 92,
76.03%), followed by cooperative agreement ( n = 18), coop-
erative clarification (n = 9), and rarely, cooperative assistance
(n = 2 ). Participants attempted disruptive interruptions in
various ways, including asking opinion ( n = 42 out of 92,
45.65%) and factual ( n = 16 ) questions or issuing opinion
(n = 7) and non-opinion ( n = 27) statements. See Table I for
more details and example interruptions.
B. 88.78% of interruption intent was correctly classified
Five interruptions triggered pre-programmed events (see
description in Sec. 3), bypassing the interruption handling
system. During a 35-second time frame in one study, there
was an abnormally large delay in the speech-to-text API, likely
caused by a network error, causing the system to be unable
to detect user speech. Hence, our system did not handle the
five interruptions (all disruptive) during this time. We exclude
these ten cases from the rest of our analysis.
Amongst the interruptions handled by the system (n = 111),
participants used wakeword(s) in 47 interruptions (decision-
making: n = 36, discussion: n = 11). Our system is designed
to immediately yield when a wakeword is “heard” during
overlapping speech (n = 43). It treats all interruption attempts
TABLE I
TYPES OF INTERRUPTIONS OBSERVED AND EXAMPLES .
Speech act Attribute Example n
Cooperative agreement (n = 18)
Verbal back-channel “Yeah”, “Okay” 13
Statement Opinion “That’s a good idea” 2
Non-
opinion
“Alright, I’m taking your sug-
gestions”
3
Cooperative assistance (n = 2)
Statement Opinion “Another thing that I was
thinking was jack knife. ”
2
Cooperative clarification ( n = 9)
Question Opinion “Uh, do we need the raincoat
and the parachute?”
5
Factual “What percent?” 4
Disruptive interruption ( n = 92)
Question Opinion “Luna, what do you think
about adding the pistol to the
list?”
42
Factual “How many states have capital
punishment?”
16
Statement Opinion “I do not think that the cos-
metic mirror is necessary. I
think we should change it into
45 caliber pistol”
7
Non-
opinion
“Uh, Luna we we don’t have
time”
27
containing wakeword(s) as strong disruptive interruptions
without passing the intent classifier module (SR2, Line 4 in
Fig. 3). Due to speech recognition errors, wakewords were
not “heard” in 4 out of 47 cases. Additionally, interruptions
made when less than two seconds of robot-planned speech
remained ( n = 13) also bypassed the intent classifier module

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
(SR3, Line 4 in Fig. 3). Of the 55 interruption attempts that
passed through the intent classification module 2, the module
correctly classified the intent of 44 interruptions ( 80.00%).
Overall, including interruptions with wakeword(s) detected
(n = 43), our system incorrectly classified the intent in 11 out
of 98 (11.22%) interruptions, meaning 88.78% were correctly
classified.
C. 93.69% of the interruptions were successfully handled
Not all interruption intent classification errors resulted in un-
successful handling, nor were all correctly classified interrup-
tions handled successfully. Of the 111 interruptions handled,
107 cases were the user’s first interruption attempt during that
turn, and 100 out of the 107 (93.46%) successfully handled.
Among the seven unsuccessful initial attempts, the robot
continued speaking in four cases due to intent classification
errors, leading the users to re-attempt. All four ( 100.00%) re-
attempts were successful. Overall, 104 out of 111 (93.69%)
interruptions were successfully handled.
TABLE II
TYPES OF INTERRUPTIONS AND HANDLING STRATEGIES (M ISCLASSIFIED
INTERRUPTIONS ARE HIGHLIGHTED ).
Interruption
type (coded)
Type
(by model)
Interruption
handling n %
Success
<2s of plan-
ned speech N/A Finish-up3 13 100%
Continue 12 91.67%Agreement Ack and continue 2 100%Agreement
Disruptive Yield immediately 2 100%
Assistance Assistance Ack and continue 1 0%
Clarification Clarify and continue 7 100%Clarification Disruptive Yield immediately 1 0%
Yield immediately 17 100%Disruptive Ack and wrap-up 5 100%
Agreement Ack and continue 1 0%
Assistance Ack and continue 1 0%
Clarification Clarify and continue 3 100%
Disruptive
wakeword
not used
Clarification LLM error handling 4 1 100%
N/A Yield immediately 43 100%wakeword
used Agreement Continue 2 0%
D. Speech recognition errors caused the majority of interrup-
tion handling failures
To better understand the cause of unsuccessfully handled
interruptions (n = 7), we analyze their potential links to intent
classification errors ( n = 11), as shown in Table II.
2111 total handled interruptions minus 43 with wakeword(s) detected, and
13 occurring near the end of robot-planned speech.
3Two cooperative agreements, one assistance, one clarification, and nine
disruptive interruptions—two used wakewords but were not “heard” by system
due to speech recognition error—were handled through finish-up.
4LLM failed to generate correctly formatted robot behavior, so the robot
performed default LLM error handling. See supplemental materials 1 Section
II for details.
• Misclassified disruptive interruption as cooperative
agreement (n = 3). The robot continued speaking due to
misclassification; two of which contained a wakeword but
were still misclassified due to speech recognition error.
• Misclassified disruptive interruption as cooperative assis-
tance (n = 1). The participant attempted to interrupt with
“The first aid kit” but abandoned the interruption mid-
sentence, which the system interpreted as cooperative
assistance. Five seconds later, the participant reattempted
a disruptive interruption, and the robot yielded immedi-
ately.
• Misclassified disruptive interruption as cooperative clar-
ification ( n = 4 ). Despite the miss-classification, these
interruptions were considered successfully handled, as the
robot answered the user’s questions.
• Misclassified cooperative agreement as disruptive ( n =
2). While the robot yielded to cooperative agreements
(e.g., “Oh, go ahead and keep going” ), these cases did
not manifest as unsuccessful interruption handling.
• Misclassified cooperative clarification as disruptive ( n =
1). A clarifying question was misclassified as disruptive
and inadequately answered due to speech recognition
error.
Although correctly classified, two interruptions were unsuc-
cessfully handled due to errors in determining where the robot
left off at the time of interruption ( n = 2). For example,
robot: Great! The flashlight is now on our list.
Next, I suggest [a] [overlapping speech]
user: [okay]
robot: It can be used as a shelter and for signaling.
user: what was it?
robot: I suggested a parachute. It can serve . . .
Since text-to-speech services do not provide word-by-word
timestamps, the system estimates what the robot has said based
on the average speaking rate and the amount of time elapsed.
To prevent missing context, we also designed the robot to
repeat its speech up to the last punctuation mark. Despite this,
misalignment still occurs; however, users were able to recover
by asking a follow-up question about the missing information
in both cases.
E. Unsuccessful interruption handling led to decreased per-
ceived inclusion, and lower discussion satisfaction.
While unsuccessful interruption handling was relatively
rare, we conducted exploratory analyses to see how the
interruption handling error might affect users’ perception of
the discussion. Pearson correlation coefficient was used to
examine the linear relationship between the number of un-
successfully handled interruptions, user’s perceived inclusion
in the discussion, and user’s satisfaction with the discussion.
We found a negative correlation between the number of
unsuccessfully handled interruptions and the user’s perceived
inclusion in the discussion, ρ(42) = −.43, p = .005. We
also found a negative correlation between the number of
unsuccessfully handled interruptions and the user’s satisfaction
with the discussion, ρ(42) = −.35, p = .021.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Nonetheless, based on the post-study interviews, partic-
ipants generally perceived their experience with the robot
positively ( n = 15 /21, describing it as “good”, “nice”, or
“helpful”). Among those who recalled initiating interruptions
(n = 18 ), 14 found it “easy” to interrupt the robot or were
generally satisfied with how it handled interruptions, while
four found it “hard”—one because the system failed to detect
five interruptions due to network error, and three because they
wanted the robot to always yield immediately.
VII. D ISCUSSION
In this work, inspired by interaction patterns observed in
human conversations, we designed and implemented an inter-
ruption handling system for conversational robots. To the best
of our knowledge, no existing robotic system has integrated in-
tention classification into its interruption handling framework.
Most existing conversational robots either ignore interruptions
or always yield to any overlapping speech. Systems that
ignore interruptions are prone to conversational breakdowns
as they disregard the user’s intention to shift the conversation.
Alternatively, systems that always yield break the interaction
flow when they yield to non-disruptive overlapping speech
(e.g., cooperative agreement, cooperative assistance, self-talk,
and backchannels), which can result in user frustration over
time. The distribution of types of interruptions depends on the
task context ( i.e., a higher number of disruptive interruptions
in our survival task, likely due to the time constraint). In our
study, a system that ignores interruptions would fail to handle
cooperative clarification (n = 8) and disruptive interruptions
(n = 73), leading it to successfully handle only 27.03% of
the interruptions. A system that always yields would fail
to handle cooperative agreement (n = 16) and cooperative
assistance (n = 1), causing it to successfully handle 84.68% of
the interruptions. In comparison, our proposed intention-based
system successfully handled 93.69% of the interruptions. This
shows the benefit of intention-based interruption handling.
Next, we discuss design implications based on insights from
our exploration to help guide future designs of interruption
handling behavior in conversational robots.
A. Robot’s Role, Task Context, and Interruption Handling
While floor holding is a common strategy for handling in-
terruptions in human conversations, robots holding the floor—
particularly during disruptive interruptions ( e.g., Fig. 1)—
were not perceived favorably by all participants. In fact, one
participant explained that “I felt like I am trying to solve the
issue, and I am just using you [the robot] as a tool to help me,”
so their ideal interaction is “the moment I speak, it wants to just
like immediate listen, and like my speech should take precedence
over anything it says” . The participants perceived the robot’s
role in the task as assistive rather than collaborative, so they
expected it to yield immediately at every turn. This shows the
importance of aligning the robot’s role and task context with its
interruption handling behavior. Future research should explore
how a robot’s designed and perceived role influences users’
expectations for how the robot should handle interruptions.
On the other hand, interruption handling design may help
reinforce a robot’s intended role in a given context. For ex-
ample, an authoritative robot in a critical task should hold the
floor more aggressively to help establish the power dynamics,
while a robot designed to be an assistive tool in a causal task
should adopt a more flexible and accommodating interruption-
handling approach. However, this needs to be approached with
caution, as studies showed that people are prone to complying
with authoritative robots even if it is wrong [12]. Future work
is needed to define the balance between when a robot should
hold the floor in conversations based on its role and the task.
B. Breaking Habits: From Scripted to Natural HRI
While some participants preferred the predictability of
having a “designated stop mechanism” (wakewords), some
also felt uncomfortable using the robot’s name ( “Luna”) or
“stop” to initiate interruptions, as it can be viewed as rude in
human-human conversations. However, one participant, who
reported to use voice assistants on a daily basis, began nearly
every query with “Luna”. When they initiated interruptions,
they consistently said “Luna” and waited for the robot to
stop speaking before proceeding with their query. While their
conversation with the robot was fast-paced, it was very rigid.
This was not a unique case in our study. The habits users have
developed when interacting with commercial voice assistants
constrain their interactions with systems capable of more nat-
ural, conversational exchanges—such as ours that can handle
interruptions more fluidly. It may also limit their perception of
the robot’s role to that of an assistive query-answering tool.
Future research should design more natural yet predictable
interactions and explore the lasting influence of current tech-
nology use on how users engage with emerging technologies
that offer more advanced conversational capabilities.
C. Limitations
We designed our interruption handling framework based
on observations from human-human conversation data from
YouTube. However, the sample size was small and limited to
a few specific settings. Additionally, our HRI study focused
solely on robot as cognitive aid in timed decision-making
and contentious discussion scenarios. Future work is needed
to explore interruption handling in physical tasks, as well as
how interruption handling can be personalized and tailored
based on user behavior ( e.g., repeated interruptions), user
preferences ( e.g., their perceived role of the robot), and task
context ( e.g., time constraint) for designing more compre-
hensive interruption management for HRI. Furthermore, our
study used convenient sampling and did not design interruption
handling to support special population. Future work should
explore how interruption handling may be designed to improve
interactions for special populations ( e.g., older adults with
neurodegenerative disease). Finally, our evaluation was limited
to one-time interactions in the lab setting. Future work should
explore longer-term, multi-session interactions in the wild.
Our system also had a few limitations. As shown in our
study, speech recognition errors were the primary cause of

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
failure for the intention classification module. While the LLM
absorbed some speech recognition errors (some errors did not
affect the LLM’s ability to understand context), our current
system cannot detect discrepancies between the transcribed
speech and actual user speech. Future work could investi-
gate using multimodal inputs with multimodal LLMs as an
additional information source. Additionally, our system does
not account for non-verbal interruptions. We observed seven
instances where the users’ body language ( e.g., opening their
mouths) indicated an intention to interrupt the robot without
making any sounds. Future work should explore how non-
verbal interruption can be leveraged in interruption handling
and how non-verbal interruptions should be handled by conver-
sational robots. In addition, our system focuses on interruption
handling in dyadic conversations; future work should explore
how robots should handle interruptions in multi-party and team
situations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion award #2141335.
AI Statement . This paper has been proofread by a lan-
guage model. The authors verified that the resulting content
accurately reflects their original intent.
CRediT author statement . Shiye Cao: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investi-
gation, Data curation, Writing, Visualization, Project Admin-
istration. Jiwon Moon: Conceptualization, Methodology, Soft-
ware, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation,
Writing, Visualization. Amama Mahmood: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation,
Writing, Visualization. Victor Nikhil Antony: Methodology,
Software, Writing. Ziang Xiao: Conceptualization, Methodol-
ogy, Writing-Review and editing. Anqi Liu: Conceptualiza-
tion, Methodology, Writing-Review and editing. Chien-Ming
Huang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing-Review and
editing, Visualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
REFERENCES
[1] James F Allen, Bradford W Miller, Eric K Ringger, and
Teresa Sikorski. A robust system for natural spoken
dialogue. arXiv preprint cmp-lg/9606023 , 1996.
[2] Sean Andrist, Xiang Zhi Tan, Michael Gleicher, and
Bilge Mutlu. Conversational gaze aversion for humanlike
robots. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM/IEEE inter-
national conference on Human-robot interaction , pages
25–32, 2014.
[3] Geoffrey W Beattie. Interruption in conversational in-
teraction, and its relation to the sex and status of the
interactants. Linguistics, 1981.
[4] Justine Cassell, Timothy Bickmore, Hannes
Vilhj´almsson, and Hao Yan. More than just a
pretty face: affordances of embodiment. In Proceedings
of the 5th international conference on Intelligent user
interfaces, pages 52–59, 2000.
[5] Leigh Clark, Nadia Pantidi, Orla Cooney, Philip Doyle,
Diego Garaialde, Justin Edwards, Brendan Spillane,
Emer Gilmartin, Christine Murad, Cosmin Munteanu,
et al. What Makes a Good Conversation?: Challenges
in Designing Truly Conversational Agents. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in
computing systems, pages 1–12, 2019.
[6] Adam Csapo, Emer Gilmartin, Jonathan Grizou, Jing-
Guang Han, Raveesh Meena, Dimitra Anastasiou, Kris-
tiina Jokinen, and Graham Wilcock. Multimodal conver-
sational interaction with a humanoid robot. In 2012 IEEE
3rd International Conference on Cognitive Infocommu-
nications (CogInfoCom), pages 667–672. IEEE, 2012.
[7] Patrick Gebhard, Tanja Schneeberger, Gregor Mehlmann,
Tobias Baur, and Elisabeth Andr´e. Designing the Impres-
sion of Social Agents’ Real-time Interruption Handling.
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Virtual Agents , pages 19–21, 2019.
[8] Felix Gervits and Matthias Scheutz. Pardon the interrup-
tion: Managing turn-taking through overlap resolution in
embodied artificial agents. In Proceedings of the 19th
annual SIGdial meeting on discourse and dialogue, pages
99–109, 2018.
[9] Julia A Goldberg. Interrupting the discourse on interrup-
tions: An analysis in terms of relationally neutral, power-
and rapport-oriented acts. Journal of Pragmatics , 14(6):
883–903, 1990.
[10] Katherine Hilton. What Does an Interruption Sound
Like? Stanford University, 2018.
[11] Chien-Ming Huang and Bilge Mutlu. Modeling and
Evaluating Narrative Gestures for Humanlike Robots. In
Robotics: Science and Systems, volume 2. Citeseer, 2013.
[12] Ulas Berk Karli, Shiye Cao, and Chien-Ming Huang.
“What If It Is Wrong”: Effects of Power Dynamics and
Trust Repair Strategy on Trust and Compliance in HRI.
In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction , pages 271–
280, 2023.
[13] Carol W Kennedy and Carl Camden. Interruptions and
nonverbal gender differences. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 8:91–108, 1983.
[14] Peter Kollock, Philip Blumstein, and Pepper Schwartz.
Sex and power in interaction: Conversational privileges
and duties. American sociological review , pages 34–46,
1985.
[15] Amama Mahmood, Junxiang Wang, and Chien-Ming
Huang. Situated Understanding of Errors in Older
Adults’ Interactions with V oice Assistants: A Month-
Long, In-Home Study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02421,
2024.
[16] Bryan A Myers, Anam Furqan, Jennifer Nebolsky, Kevin
Caro, and Junia Zhu. Patterns for how users overcome
obstacles in voice user interfaces. In Proceedings of the
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 1–7, 2018.
[17] Song Hee Park and Alexa Hepburn. The Benefits of a
Jeffersonian Transcript. Frontiers in Communication, 7:
779434, 2022.
[18] V ojtˇech Pipek. On Backchannels in English Conversa-
tion. PhD thesis, Masarykova univerzita, Pedagogick ´a
fakulta, 2007.
[19] Dennis Reidsma, Iwan de Kok, Daniel Neiberg,
Sathish Chandra Pammi, Bart van Straalen, Khiet
Truong, and Herwin van Welbergen. Continuous interac-
tion with a virtual human. Journal on Multimodal User
Interfaces, 4:97–118, 2011.
[20] Merle M Reimann, Florian A Kunneman, Catharine
Oertel, and Koen V Hindriks. A survey on dialogue man-
agement in human-robot interaction. ACM Transactions
on Human-Robot Interaction , 2024.
[21] Abigail J Sellen. Remote conversations: The effects
of mediating talk with technology. Human-computer
interaction, 10(4):401–444, 1995.
[22] Ruchen Wen, Alyssa Hanson, Zhao Han, and Tom
Williams. Fresh start: Encouraging politeness in
wakeword-driven human-robot interaction. In Proceed-
ings of the 2023 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction, pages 112–121, 2023.
[23] Liu Yang. What If I Interrupt You. In Proceedings
of the 2021 International Conference on Multimodal
Interaction, pages 827–831, 2021.
[24] Liu Yang, Catherine Achard, and Catherine Pelachaud.
Multimodal classification of interruptions in humans’
interaction. In Proceedings of the 2022 International
Conference on Multimodal Interaction , pages 597–604,
2022.