--- Page 1 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
Available online 24 June 2023
2666-920X/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Contentslistsavailableat ScienceDirect
Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computers-and-education-artiﬁcial-intelligence
Learnersourcing in the age of AI: Student, educator and machine 
partnerships for content creation
HassanKhosravi a,∗, PaulDenny b, StevenMoore c, JohnStamper c
a The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
b University of Auckland, New Zealand
c Carnegie Mellon University, United States of America
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Learnersourcing
Crowdsourcing in education
Student generating content
Human-AI partnership
Engaging students in creating novel content, also referred to as learnersourcing, is increasingly recognised as 
an eﬀective approach to promoting higher-order learning, deeply engaging students with course material and 
developing large repositories of content suitable for personalisedlearning.  Despite these beneﬁts, some common 
concerns and criticisms are associated with learnersourcing (e.g., the quality of resources created by students, 
challenges in incentivising engagement and lack of availability of reliable learnersourcing systems), which have 
limited its adoption. This paper presents a framework that considers the existing learnersourcing literature, the 
latest insights from the learning sciences and advances in AI to oﬀer promising future directions for developing 
learnersourcing systems. The framework is designed around important questions and human-AI partnerships 
relating to four key aspects: (1) creating novel content, (2) evaluating the quality of the created content, 
(3) utilising learnersourced contributions of students and (4) enabling instructors to support students in the 
learnersourcing process. We then present two comprehensive case studies that illustrate the application of the 
proposed framework in relation to two existing popular learnersourcing systems.
1. Introduction
Our increasingly connected world is empowering learners and en-
abling exciting new pedagogies. In particular, educational tools that 
facilitate collaboration between students can help to foster a wide range 
of social and domain-speciﬁc skills (Jeong et al., 2019). The litera-
ture on computer supported collaborative learning documents a diverse 
range of pedagogies that have been applied for decades in many sub-
ject domains and educational levels (Lehtinen et al., 1999, Roberts, 
2005, Kaliisa et al., 2022). One recent approach, derived from foun-
dational work on contributing student pedagogies (Collis & Moonen, 
2002, Hamer et al., 2012), involves students creating and sharing learn-
ing resources with one another. Such activities have gained popularity 
in recent years and are associated with two broad types of beneﬁts. 
Firstly, creating learning content is a cognitively demanding task that 
requires students to engage deeply with course concepts and exhibit 
behaviours at the highest level of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational ob-
jectives (Hilton et al., 2022). Secondly, leveraging the creative power 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address:h.khosravi@uq.edu.au(H.Khosravi).
URL:https://hassan-khosravi.net(H.Khosravi).
1 https://en.wikipedia.org.
of many students can result in the rapid and cost-eﬀective creation of 
large repositories of learning resources that can, in turn, be used for 
practice and to support personalisedlearning  experiences (Singh et al., 
2021).
Learnersourcing is a commonly used term to describe the prac-
tice of having students work collaboratively to generate shared learn-
ing resources (Kim, 2015). It is related to the more general task of 
crowdsourcing, in which tasks are outsourced to a pool of partici-
pants, often drawn from large and undeﬁned populations, each of whom 
makes a small contribution to some product. The free online encyclope-
dia, Wikipedia,1 is perhaps the canonical example of a crowdsourcing 
project where the number of users of the resource vastly outweighs 
the number contributors (Antin, 2011). Crowdsourcing participants are 
also rarely end users in the context of tools such as Amazon’s Mechani-
cal Turk, which is a platform that harnesses human computation in the 
form of microtasks to solve larger problems (Doroudi et al., 2018). In 
such cases, crowdworkers are typically paid a small fee for their con-
tributions, although these kinds of models have drawn criticism around 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100151
Received 17 October 2022; Received in revised form 18 June 2023; Accepted 19 June 2023
--- Page 2 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
2
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Fig. 1.A learnersourcing framework related to creating novel content, evaluating the quality of the created content, utilising learnersourced contributions of students 
and enabling instructors to support students in the learnersourcing process.
their exploitative nature (Schmidt, 2013). In contrast, learnersourcing 
adopts a more human-centred focus and involves a cohort of learn-
ers studying a common subject. The process of developing material 
in a learnersourcing activity is pedagogically beneﬁcial to the learner, 
whereas in a more traditional crowdsourcing task it is a means to an 
end (Jiang et al., 2018). Learners are also inherently motivated to use 
the materials developed by their peers, and this is a deﬁning feature of 
such pedagogies (Hamer et al., 2008).
As interest in learnersourcing grows, recent work has emerged seek-
ing to inform the design of learnersourcing tools and to guide research 
activities. Khosravi, Demartini, et al. (2021) reﬂect on the experience 
of building an adaptive learnersourcing platform and present a series 
of data-driven lessons for developers and researchers. They recommend 
the use of accurate and explainable consensus approaches for assessing 
content quality, incentives for encouraging high-quality contributions 
and open learner modelling to make progress visible to learners. They 
also argue strongly for the need to harness the potential of artiﬁcial 
intelligence (AI) for improving feedback and generating eﬀective rec-
ommendations for learners. More recently, Singh et al. (2022) propose 
a theoretical framework for studying and designing learnersourcing sys-
tems. Their framework is centredaround  a set of four design questions 
previously used to classify crowdsourcing systems, which they augment 
with two questions that focus on the prerequisite skills and the learning 
outcomes of those who contribute new learning artefacts. They apply 
their framework to classify prior learnersourcing literature, and oﬀer it 
as a guide for practitioners when designing novel systems. They sug-
gest that the two primary questions in their framework, “what is being 
done?” and “what are contributors learning from the task?”, should be 
answered as the ﬁrst step in any new initiatives. When considering fu-
ture directions, they highlight the complementary relationship between 
learnersourcing and AI. For example, when meaningful learning activi-
ties naturally produce data that can be used for training models, which 
can then be used to evaluate resource quality and make personalised 
recommendations.
In the current paper, we propose a novel framework that captures 
what we see as the four essential components of learnersourcing mod-
els. Our framework, which is organised around fundamental activities, 
is complementary to that proposed by Singh et al. (2022) which uses 
a learner-centric rather than an activity-centric lens. They adapt the 
‘what’, ‘who’, ‘why’, and ‘how’ design questions proposed by Geiger 
et al. (2011), providing an excellent framework for classifying prior 
work. In contrast, our framework considers the creation, evaluation, 
utilisation and instructor oversight of resources to be the four deﬁning 
activities in the learnersourcing model. In our view, one of the beneﬁts 
of this activity-centric model is that each component of the framework 
represents a core activity in which human eﬀort is directly enhanced 
through partnership with AI. Given the rapid and transformative emer-
gence of generative AI powered by large language models (Kasneci et 
al., 2023), human-AI partnerships will play an essential role in the near 
future and thus a suitable framework to capture and describe these part-
nerships is needed. Prior learner-centric frameworks that focus on issues 
of learner mindset and motivation are very valuable, for example to cat-
egorise literature and design incentive systems, but are less suitable for 
capturing the increasingly important role of generative AI (Chao et al., 
2017). In presenting our framework, we highlight several questions of 
interest for each component, and we discuss related work, current chal-
lenges and promising future directions.
We present the framework in Section 2, organising key questions 
around the ‘Create’, ‘Evaluate’, ‘Utilise’ and ‘Oversight’ components. 
Section 3 then presents two case studies that illustrate the application 
of the framework in the context of two existing learnersourcing sys-
tems; namely, PeerWise (Denny et al., 2008) and RiPPLE (Khosravi et 
al., 2019). These case studies are complementary as PeerWise is consid-
ered a pioneering learnersourcing system, originally developed in 2008. 
In contrast, RiPPLE was originally released in 2019 and is still under ac-
tive development, which has enabled it to beneﬁt from state-of-the-art 
insights from the ﬁelds of crowdsourcing, AI and human-computer in-
teraction (HCI). Finally, Section 5 provides concluding remarks about 
the future of learnersourcing. In particular it highlights the growing im-
pact of AI including the use of generative language models for creating 
new content, deep learning models for evaluating content quality, rec-
ommendation algorithms for helping students better utilise content, and 
the use of experts in the loop across the four dimensions of our frame-
work.
2. Developing learnersourcing systems
This section presents the framework that considers related work, 
current challenges and promising future directions around the four key 
activities supported by learnersourcing systems. The framework is de-
picted in Fig.1, and we organise the remainder of this section around 
these four components. Section2.1focuses on the authorship and cre-
--- Page 3 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
3
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
ation of novel content by learners. Section 2.2 focuses on how the 
quality of learnersourced contributions can be eﬀectively evaluated. 
Section2.3focuses on how repositories of content created via learner-
sourcing can be eﬀectively utilised to support student learning. Finally, 
Section2.4focuses on the role of educators and how they can oversee 
and provide support to students engaged in learnersourcing.
As depicted in the framework in Fig. 1, each component interacts 
with the other components in various ways. When content is created 
by learners, that content can be evaluated by other learners, utilised 
for study and review purposes, and overseen by instructors with ex-
pertise in the subject area. In all cases, the feedback that is generated 
– either explicitly through evaluation or instructor oversight, or im-
plicitly through utilisation – can be used by the author of the content 
to edit or improve their existing artefacts, or to create more eﬀective 
content in the future. Insights generated through both the utilisation 
and evaluation of resources by learners can feed directly into the pro-
cess of instructor oversight, for example to facilitate eﬃcient use of the 
instructor’s time to make high impact decisions. Similarly, aspects of 
expert judgement can be used to provide feedback to students when 
evaluating content and to utilise resources that are approved by the in-
structor. Finally, learner evaluation of content can feed directly into 
recommendation algorithms that improve the utilisation of that con-
tent. Conversely, utilisation patterns – for example, aggregated data on 
selected options or popular answers – can be useful data for learners 
when evaluating learnersourced content.
One of the key contributions of this paper is that it leverages recent 
developments in the ﬁelds of human-centred AI and AI in education to 
highlight opportunities for human-AI partnership across the four dimen-
sions of the framework. In particular, it leverages recent developments 
from the ﬁeld of AI in education such as the use of generative lan-
guage models for creating educational content, deep learning models 
for evaluating educational content quality, learner modelling and rec-
ommendation algorithms for helping students better utilise content, and 
relying on instructors as experts-in-the-loop in the context of learner-
sourcing. We discuss these in more depth below:
•T h e creation of educational content is a vital aspect of learner-
sourcing. With respect to ‘Create’, our framework focuses on the 
potential range of content that can be produced, the methods of 
incentivising its creation, and the collaboration of learners and 
AI to jointly create resources. For example, generative AI models 
have proven adept at producing certain kinds of learning resources 
(Leinonen et al., 2023), and these models can be directly inte-
grated into learnersourcing systems to improve the eﬃciency and 
the quality of the content that learners ultimately produce. We 
provide a concrete example of such integration, that of generat-
ing distractors for multiple-choice questions, as part of one of our 
case studies in Section3.1.1.
• Evaluating the quality of learner-generated content is an essential 
aspect of learnersourcing systems. Although prior work has shown 
that much of the content generated by students is suﬃciently high 
quality to beneﬁt learning (Kelley et al., 2019, Walsh et al., 2018), 
the presence of low quality content negatively aﬀects learning ef-
ﬁciency (Moore, Stamper, et al., 2021). With respect to ‘Evaluate’, 
we consider the use of peer review, AI assistance for improving the 
reliabilityof  a peer review process and the provision of explainable 
and actionable feedback to content authors.
•A s students utilise content, ﬁne-grained interaction data can be col-
lected in real-time and provided as input to learner models that pro-
duce personalisedrecommendations  of content, improving learning 
eﬃciency (Papanikolaou, 2014). With respect to ‘Utilise’, we con-
sider the application of such learner models as adaptive engines 
that recommend resources, as well as the use of learnersourced 
content outside of institutional silos.
•M a n u a l review of learner-generated content by experts does not 
scale, and so support for eﬃcient moderation is critical (Moore, 
Nguyen, Stamper, 2023). With respect to ‘Oversight’, we consider 
the provision of AI-assisted actionable insights to instructors, and 
the eﬃcient use of their time to balance the cost and reliability of 
expert judgements.
2.1. Creating learnersourced content
The creation of educationally-relevant materials by students is cen-
tral to learnersourcing activities, and the term student-generated content
(SGC) is often used to describe the resources produced in the context 
of learnersourcing (Snowball & McKenna, 2017, Wheeler et al., 2008, 
Hardy et al., 2014). Creating content can be a challenging task for stu-
dents, but one which oﬀers several distinct learning beneﬁts (Singh et 
al., 2021). Consider, for example, some of the typical processes that a 
student might follow when creating content as part of a learnersourcing 
activity. To prepare for creating a speciﬁc learning artefact, a student 
would beneﬁt from studying the requisite material in order to under-
stand the concepts being targeted. While constructing the artefact, the 
student may generate worked solutions or explanations of the relevant 
ideas, either for explicit inclusion as part of the material to be published 
or for their own beneﬁt. Either way, such explanations are beneﬁcial 
and research into the self-explanation eﬀect suggests that students who 
explain examples to themselves, whether prompted or not, learn more 
eﬀectively (VanLehn et al., 1992, Bisra et al., 2018).
Students also beneﬁt from the generative aspects of content cre-
ation. When compared to reading content produced by others, which 
tends to be a passive activity, generating content leads to more robust 
recall (Crutcher & Healy, 1989). This phenomenon is related to the 
widely studied ‘generation eﬀect’ which suggests that people remem-
ber information better when they take an active role in its production 
(Slamecka & Graf, 1978). Originally established within the context of 
simple memorisation tasks, the generation eﬀect has been shown to 
generalise to more complex learning materials (Rittle-Johnson & Kmi-
cikewycz, 2008, Kinjo & Snodgrass, 2000, Kelley et al., 2019) and across 
a variety of domains (DeWinstanley & Bjork, 2004, Scapin, 1982). More 
broadly, the content creation aspect of learnersourcing is an inherently 
active task, and more eﬀective for building knowledge than activities 
that are more passive such as listening to lectures delivered by an 
expert. This active construction of knowledge is a central tenet of con-
structivist learning theory (Bada & Olusegun, 2015), which provides 
theoretical support for activities such as learnersourcing. Moreover, so-
cial constructivism posits that co-constructing knowledge with others 
provides an important cultural context on which personal knowledge 
can be built (Rannikmäe et al., 2020). In a similar vein, Bredow et al. 
(2021) cite constructivism and social constructivism as providing the-
oretical support for the academic and interpersonal beneﬁts of ﬂipped 
learning.
Despite these well established beneﬁts, there remains some debate 
as to how to best incentivise students to create learning materials (Khan 
et al., 2020). For many educational activities, a common strategy to 
promote participation is to reward students with some form of mark 
or course credit. There is a tension here, as associating a large amount 
of course credit with a learnersourcing task places a burden of evalua-
tion on instructors, whereas too small a credit can lead to resentment 
from some students that the reward is not commensurate with the ef-
fort (Doyle et al., 2019). Rather than making it compulsory, Singh et 
al. (2021)explored  giving students the choice to create multiple-choice 
questions (MCQs) for their peers in the context of a large massive open 
online course (MOOC). They found that learners created higher quality 
content and valued the activity more when they could choose to partic-
ipate rather than being required to do so, however fewer than 10% of 
learners voluntarily created content. While this may be suitable in the 
context of a large MOOC, in small class settings low levels of partici-
pation may limit the usefulness of the generated resource for practice 
purposes. From a user interface perspective, the use of virtual rewards 
such as points and badges has shown some promise for incentivising 
--- Page 4 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
4
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
students in learnersourcing contexts, however they tend to be more ef-
fective motivators for the utilisation rather than the creation of content 
(Yeckehzaare et al., 2020). For example, one study found that a badge-
based achievement system had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the number of 
questions answered by students for practice, but not on the number of 
questions authored (Denny, 2013). Subsequent work went further to es-
tablish a causal link between these types of gamiﬁcation mechanics and 
learning outcomes, mediated by practice testing behaviour (Denny et 
al., 2018).
2.1.1. Types of content
In general, the learnersourcing model is broad and places no bound-
aries on the type of content that students can produce. Any type of 
content that is associated with a course and typically produced by an 
instructor could be learnersourced by students. In practice, assessment 
and review materials such as questions and exercises form a popular cat-
egory of learnersourced resources (Moore, Stamper, et al., 2022). Their 
popularity may be explained in two ways. Firstly, it leaves the pro-
duction of core instructional material in the hands of experts. This not 
only helps to ensure that students build appropriate knowledge prior to 
generating materials that assess that knowledge, but it can be viewed 
as less controversial than having primary learning resources generated 
by non-experts (Hamer, 2006). Secondly, certain formats of assessment 
and review resources are very familiar to students, meaning they have 
plentiful examples to draw from. A good example of this is the widely 
popular multiple-choice question (MCQ) format, which is the most com-
mon type of artefact explored to date in the context of learnersourcing. 
Student-generated MCQs appear in tools such as RiPPLE (Khosravi et 
al., 2019), Quizzical (Riggs et al., 2020), UpGrade (Wang et al., 2019) 
and PeerWise (Denny et al., 2008). Other kinds of practice questions 
and exercises that have been explored include complex assessments 
on circuits and electronics (Mitros, 2015), Structured Query Language 
(SQL) practice exercises for database courses (Leinonen et al., 2020) 
and both small-scale (Denny et al., 2011) and large-scale programming 
problems (Pirttinen et al., 2018).
Although student-generated questions are common in the learner-
sourcing literature, a wide variety of other instructional content has also 
been explored. For example, Gehringer et al. (2006)describe  the use of 
their Expertiza tool for managing student-generated contributions to 
their course textbook, which included students making improvements 
to existing explanations contained in the book and creating new exam-
ples for the concepts described in each chapter. Other examples that 
illustrate the variety of SGC in the literature on learnersourcing include 
subgoal labels for video tutorials (Kim et al., 2013, Weir et al., 2015), 
subgoal hierarchies for programming exercises (Jin & Kim, 2022), the 
underlying knowledge components for assessment items (Moore et al., 
2020), personalised hints for engineering design problems (Glassman 
et al., 2016), explanations for peer instruction questions (Bhatnagar et 
al., 2020), solutions to open-ended questions (Wang et al., 2019) and 
explanations for programming misconceptions (Guo et al., 2020). Hills 
(2015) describe the use of both learnersourced blogs and videos in a 
psychology course, where students generate content that aligns with 
their personal interests. Students were tasked with collecting existing 
resources from their everyday experiences and curating them on a blog, 
as well as producing novel content in the form of persuasive videos pro-
moting pro-social messages.
2.1.2. Promoting high quality content
In order to create high quality content within a learnersourcing 
task, students need both domain-speciﬁc knowledge and task-speciﬁc 
knowledge (Devine & Kozlowski, 1995). The former is typically devel-
oped through engagement with course learning materials and other 
curricula resources. Alongside this core disciplinary knowledge, stu-
dents also need to understand how to construct high quality learning 
resources. Depending on the type of artefacts being learnersourced, this 
may include knowledge of how to construct eﬀective MCQs, or how to 
generate useful hints or helpful explanations (Snow et al., 2019). This 
task-speciﬁc knowledge may be taught directly by the instructor or in-
corporated as part of the learnersourcing system (Doyle et al., 2019).
Various approaches for the instruction of task-speciﬁc knowledge 
have been reported. Doyle et al. (2019)d e s c r i b e a learnersourcing ac-
tivity involving MCQs where guides for constructing eﬀective MCQs 
were made available to students on the course learning platform. How-
ever, they observed that these guides were infrequently consulted by 
students, despite the fact that students complained of the need for more 
support on how to construct questions. As a result, they recommend 
teaching the principles of good MCQ design explicitly, and providing 
examples of both good and weak questions to illustrate these principles. 
Bates et al. (2014) describe a deliberate approach to prepare students 
for generating MCQs, involving a 90 minute tutorial consisting of sev-
eral elements. These included a content-neutral quiz to familiarise stu-
dents with the terminology of an MCQ (e.g., stem, options, distractors), 
a self-diagnosis quiz to guide students towards a learning-orientation 
rather than being performance focused, a representation of Vygotsky’s 
“Zone of Proximal Development” (Chaiklin, 2003) to challenge students 
to author questions of high cognitive value, and question exemplars. To 
assess the value in this deliberate approach to teaching task-speciﬁc 
knowledge, the authors evaluated the questions authored by students 
ﬁnding that 75% passed a set of quality criteria including explanation 
detail, distractor plausibility, question clarity and cognitive level. An 
even more rigorous approach to scaﬀolding the MCQ creation process 
was documented by Hilton et al. (2022), in which students were intro-
duced to increasingly complex tasks in ﬁve distinct steps over a period 
of 10 weeks. These began with students constructing short statements 
that are either true or false, to practise writing concise statements tar-
geting a single topic, and then suggesting improvements to MCQs they 
found online before progressing to authoring their own MCQs. The au-
thors see their scaﬀolding of task-speciﬁc skills as essential to the broad 
and deep conceptual beneﬁts they observed as a result of the learner-
sourcing task.
One commonly reported challenge with the learnersourcing of as-
sessment items such as MCQs is that many of them end up being simple 
recall questions (Moore, Nguyen, et al., 2021). For example, in a study 
by Bottomley and Denny that used PeerWise for learnersourcing MCQs, 
more than half of the student-generated questions were classiﬁed at 
the lowest level of the revised Bloom’s taxonomy (Krathwohl, 2002). In 
their study, students were provided exemplar questions but were not ex-
plicitly instructed on the learning objectives or the cognitive processes 
associated with them as described by a taxonomy like Bloom’s. The ex-
tent to which such instruction is helpful is not clear and is likely highly 
contextual. In some situations, the use of exemplars alone has proven 
eﬀective for training novices in other crowdsourcing contexts. For ex-
ample, Doroudi et al. (2016)e x p l o r e d the eﬀects of diﬀerent training 
strategies on novices in a crowdsourcing task, ﬁnding that the provision 
of expert examples outperformed other training strategies. Similarly, in 
the context of learnersourcing subgoal labels, Choi et al. (2022)present  
learners with good examples of subgoal labels in a ‘warm-up’ train-
ing phase before they are asked to create their own labels. Also in the 
learnersourcing literature, Huang et al. (2021)r e p o r t e d good success 
explicitly teaching students about Bloom’s taxonomy and its application 
to assessment items. Students practised assessing questions according 
to Bloom’s taxonomy before creating their own, and the authors found 
that a selection of the student-generated questions performed as well as 
questions generated by academics on summative exams.
Moving beyond task-speciﬁc knowledge, Lahza et al. (2022)explore  
the beneﬁts in a learnersourcing context of scaﬀolding self-regulated 
learning behaviours. In a controlled study, they investigated the beneﬁts 
of explicitly prompting students to plan their work before creation, self-
monitor during creation, and self-assess after creation. Although these 
metacognitive scaﬀolds have robust theoretical beneﬁts, in practice 
the authors found that they increased task complexity and completion 
time, without any signiﬁcant improvement in the quality of the content 
--- Page 5 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
5
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
students produced. In general, the extent to which diﬀerent types of 
training resources are eﬀective, and the tradeoﬀs they present in terms 
of time and scalability of instruction, is currently under-explored in the 
learnersourcing literature.
2.1.3. AI assistance in content creation
Creating high-quality and novel content is demanding, and not all 
students engage well with the generative aspects of learnersourcing 
(Moore, Nguyen, et al., 2021). Indeed, prior research has shown that 
students are often more inclined to use and evaluate resources that are 
created by others rather than expend the eﬀort needed to create high 
quality content of their own (Singh et al., 2021, Pirttinen & Leinonen, 
2022). Using machine learning techniques to automatically generate 
novel content, at least in a draft form that a student could reﬁne, is 
therefore a promising approach for scaﬀolding the learnersourcing pro-
cess with AI.
Large language models (LLMs) have recently emerged and proven 
very eﬀective at generating realistic human-like content. Models like 
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) and Open AI’s Codex (Chen et al., 2021), which 
are respectively ﬁne-tuned to produce natural language text and source 
code, have received a great deal of attention. Such models are not lim-
ited to textual output, with models such as DALL⋅E (Ramesh et al., 
2022) being able to produce extremely creative artistic images from 
natural language prompts. These models tend to be very good at “few 
shot” learning, in which the input prompt includes one or more con-
textual examples which leads to the generation of a novel output. Early 
evidence suggests that these models are very good at creating educa-
tional content (Wang et al., 2022). Recent work by Drori et al. (2021)
applied both GPT-3 and Codex to generate novel university-level math-
ematics problems with explanations, and to solve them with equivalent 
success rates to humans.
In natural language processing and machine learning, it is common 
to use questions to train models to both generate higher quality ques-
tions and enable them to answer them with higher accuracy (Wang, 
Manning, et al., 2021). Naturally, learnersourcing could provide a great 
source of training data for these applications. Such models may be use-
ful in assisting with the content creation phase of learnersourcing. For 
example, a learner could provide an initial prompt to the model, which 
may include examples and other contextual priming information, and 
would then be able to evaluate and reﬁne the content produced by the 
model. Such an approach places a greater emphasis on content evalu-
ation than on content creation, and may improve the eﬃciency with 
which large-scale resources can be produced. (Sarsa et al., 2022) use 
the term “robosourcing” to describe this augmentation to the tradi-
tional learnersourcing model. In general, we expect that as generative 
AI models improve and become more deeply embedded in educational 
contexts, there will be a shift in emphasis with respect to the applica-
tion of higher-order thinking skills. Creating novel content, traditionally 
seen as an important high-level skill, will become relatively less im-
portant when compared to evaluating and critically analysing existing 
content, given the ease with which AI models can produce new content. 
Similarly, the importance of developing certain lower-order, founda-
tional skills may become relatively less important given the availability 
of AI models that provide suitable support (Denny et al., 2022).
2.1.4. Co-creation models
Most existing learnersourcing systems expect individual learners to 
generate and contribute complete learning resources (for example, in 
the case of MCQs, this would typically include the stem, a set of dis-
tractors, and an explanation or sample solution) (Singh et al., 2022). 
This requires a large investment of time from a learner and can be er-
ror prone as individual parts of the artefact are not reviewed by others 
before being assembled. In contrast, many crowdsourcing systems tend 
to be structured around small micro-tasks (e.g., labelling one image 
(Chang et al., 2017)) which permit useful contributions with little time 
and eﬀort. Moreover, these systems often support a co-creation model 
where individuals can collaborate on the same artefact. Examples of 
this type of model include editors in Wikipedia being able to directly 
modify content produced by others, and forums like StackOverﬂow al-
lowing users with suﬃcient reputation to edit questions and responses 
generated by other users. Another early example of this idea was the 
novel wordprocessor plugin by Bernstein et al. (2010), called Soylent, 
which permitted crowdworkers to make small proof-reading edits to a 
document, including minor formatting and wording changes.
Learnersourcing can make use of co-creation models to empower in-
dividual learners to contribute in a variety of diﬀerent ways. Singh et al. 
(2021)explored  the factors that inﬂuenced learners’ decisions to create 
content when it was optional to do so. Lack of time, low conﬁdence and 
lack of interest were the primary reasons cited for choosing to not cre-
ate content. As a result, they advocate for co-creation models that allow 
for tiered contributions such that students with little time or less con-
ﬁdence could contribute in more granular ways. In the context of their 
study, which involved authoring MCQs, they suggested that rather cre-
ating a complete MCQ, learners could provide a set of distractors or 
write an explanation. Recent work by Kim et al. (2022)e x p l o r e d this 
very idea through a modularised approach to learnersourcing MCQs. 
In their model, individual components of a question, such as a single 
option or a stem, could be authored and reﬁned by learners thus pro-
viding ﬂexibility for diﬀerent learners to contribute in ways that suit 
their interests.
2.2. Evaluating learnersourced content
One of the eﬀects of learnersourcing is that it makes it relatively 
easy to develop large repositories of SGC. While strong evidence from 
previous work suggests that a large portion of the SGC is of a high-
quality and meets rigorous judgemental and statistical criteria (Walsh 
et al., 2018, Galloway & Burns, 2015), it also suggests that students 
commonly create resources that are ineﬀective, inappropriate, or in-
correct (Tackett et al., 2018, Denny et al., 2009, Bates et al., 2014). 
As a consequence, to eﬀectively use SGC repositories, there is a need 
for separating high-quality from low-quality resources. One approach 
is to engage instructors as experts in evaluating the quality of the re-
sources; however, the instructor-led quality evaluation is not scalable 
and can be expensive due to the potentially large size of the repositories 
(Section2.4explores plausible methods of optimally using instructor’s 
limited availability towards evaluating content). This section explores 
two alternative approaches of employing human or machine compu-
tation for evaluating the quality of the resources. Primarily, we ﬁrst 
explore the possibility of incorporating co-regulation models of a peer 
review process where students are engaged in assessing the quality of 
resources authored by their peers. We then explore how AI methods 
can be incorporated to help with the assessment of the quality of the re-
sources. We ﬁnally discuss the need for accurate, fair and transparent 
evaluation methods, regardless of whether they are done by humans or 
machines.
2.2.1. Peer review models for evaluating quality
Peer review is a well established model for evaluating quality, often 
employed for academic publishing (Tennant, 2018). To determine the 
suitability of the peer review process in the context of learnersourcing, 
it is important to ﬁrst consider whether engaging students in evaluat-
ing content are beneﬁcialto  their learning. If such beneﬁts are absent, 
ethical issues arise with respect to utilising students as cheap labour to 
reduce the workload of instructors (Zdravkova, 2020). There is however 
a general consensus that engaging students in peer review has many 
beneﬁts (Nicol et al., 2014). These include enabling them to improve 
their comprehension of the content (Li et al., 2010), develop evaluative 
judgement (Tai et al., 2018, Gyamﬁ et al., 2021b, Khosravi, Gyamﬁ, 
et al., 2021) and a sense of accountability (Kao, 2013), and improve 
their writing (Polisda, 2017) and ability to provide constructive feed-
back (Lundstrom & Baker, 2009).
--- Page 6 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
6
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
An equally important question to consider is whether students have 
the capacity to eﬀectively evaluate the quality of peer-created re-
sources. Prior work suggests that students by and large have the abil-
ity to accurately evaluate the quality of learning content (Galloway & 
Burns, 2015, Tackett et al., 2018). Having students as evaluators also 
addresses expert blind spot challenges as they would evaluate the ef-
fectiveness of a resource based on their own previous misconceptions 
(Nathan et al., 2001). However, as experts-in-training, their judgements 
cannot wholly be trusted (Abdi, Khosravi, Sadiq, Demartini, 2021). A 
common solution, which is also incorporated in academic publishing, 
is to rely on the wisdom of the crowd rather than one person by em-
ploying a redundancy-based strategy and assigning the same reviewing 
task to multiple users (Reily et al., 2009). Other strategies such as util-
isation of rubrics (Gyamﬁ et al., 2021b, 2021a), exemplars (Carless et 
al., 2018), guides on providing eﬀective feedback (Darvishi, Khosravi, 
Abdi, et al., 2022) and comparative judgement where students choose 
the ‘better’ of two pieces of work (Cambre et al., 2018, Palisse et al., 
2021) have also been shown to be an eﬀective method for helping stu-
dents develop evaluative judgement.
The peer evaluation process can determine the way in which re-
sources are shared. For example, one approach is to allow optional and 
subjective ratings on artefacts that have already been made available to 
all students (Denny et al., 2008). In such cases, aggregate ratings can 
be used to help students search for artefacts that have received higher 
quality scores (Denny et al., 2009) or be used to support personalisation 
mechanics (Williams et al., 2016). A more restrictive approach might 
follow the academic publishing process in which artefacts are judged 
by a subset of users using multi-criteria rubrics. In this case, reviews 
are used to determine whether a resource is of high enough quality to 
be approved and shared with other students or if it lacks the required 
quality and is to be rejected and sent back with feedback to the author 
(Khosravi et al., 2019). A workﬂow was developed by Lee et al. (2020)
and deployed into a system known as Questionable, that allowed stu-
dents to author and review questions that were then presented to their 
peers. Using this workﬂow, students would leave feedback regarding a 
question generated by their peers, indicating how it might be improved 
or assessing the quality and usefulness of it. These reviews were then 
presented to course staﬀ, that used them to quickly determine the qual-
ity of the question or make any necessary changes to them. Ultimately 
this allowed the course to make quick use of the questions and ensure 
only the highest quality ones were being shown to the students.
2.2.2. AI in content evaluation
While the notion of following an academic publishing model for 
evaluating SGC is time-eﬀective and supports student learning, it does 
introduce new challenges where AI can be of assistance. Here we pro-
vide two examples; ﬁrstly, unlike the publishing model where a meta 
reviewer makes the ﬁnal call, in the case of SGC, it is impractical to ex-
pect the instructor to meta-review possibly thousands of artefacts that 
are being created in their course. Therefore, the process of deciding 
whether an artefact is to be approved or rejected based on multiple 
reviews needs to be automated. This raises a new problem commonly re-
ferred to as the consensus problem (Roitero et al., 2023). In the absence 
of ground truth, how can we optimally integrate the decisions made 
by multiple people towards an accurate ﬁnal decision? Traditional con-
sensus approaches rely on general statistical aggregations, such as the 
arithmetic mean, median, or majority vote (Zheng et al., 2017). How-
ever, previous studies have shown that there is an evidential diﬀerence 
in the judgemental ability of students (Abdi, Khosravi, Sadiq, Demar-
tini, 2021). Inspired by work from crowdsourcing (Zheng et al., 2017), 
an interesting approach has been to use machine learning models to 
infer the reliability of a reviewer or a review such that the consensus 
model can put more weight on decisions made by reliable reviewers 
(Darvishi et al., 2021). Another challenge with relying on student re-
views and feedback relates to students’ failure in providing high-quality 
feedback, which leads to substantial negative consequences such as low-
ering standards (Yeager et al., 2014), reducing trust in the outcome 
(Carless, 2009), and making reviewees less likely to revise their work 
(Sommers, 1982). Here, inspired by advances in natural language pro-
cessing to evaluate the quality of a review (Negi et al., 2016, Devlin et 
al., 2018), a possibility is to develop quality control functions that auto-
matically assess the quality of the submitted feedback and ask students 
to improve, if necessary (Darvishi, Khosravi, Abdi, et al., 2022).
There have also been various attempts to automatically evaluate the 
quality of MCQs and more broadly educational artefacts. Metrics such 
as the discrimination index from classical test theory have been used 
for decades for identifying the quality of MCQs (Malau-Aduli et al., 
2014). However, a limitation of this method is that it requires large 
quantities of data on student responses to items. Therefore, it cannot 
be used to evaluate the quality of new questions. The 2020 education 
challenge (Wang, Lamb, et al., 2021) from the Conference on Neural 
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) has started a new wave of 
using advanced AI models for the automatic determination of the qual-
ity of MCQs (Task 3 of the challenge). Three teams were announced as 
co-winners of this task, each achieving an 80% agreement with human 
evaluators’ judgements. The approaches by two of the three winning 
teams Shinahara & Takehara and TAL Education presented solutions 
that computed explicitly-deﬁned features based on the hypothesis that 
high-quality MCQs are appropriately diﬃcult, readable, and have a bal-
ance among answer choices (Wang, Lamb, et al., 2021). Interestingly, 
the other winning approach by McBroom & Paassen did not use any 
complex feature engineering and had the very simple hypothesis that 
the quality of an MCQ correlates with the conﬁdence of students an-
swering it (McBroom & Paassen, 2020). They argued that high student 
conﬁdence implies that the question is clear and unambiguous. In ad-
dition, they argued that the Dunning-Kruger eﬀect (Dunning, 2011) 
may result in students holding key misconceptions by reporting high 
conﬁdence in incorrect answers if the question clearly addresses this 
misconception. More recently, Ni et al. (2021) propose DeepQR that, 
alongside computing explicitly-deﬁned features, uses a 2-layer trans-
former encoder to consider semantic features, which are designed to 
capture relations between diﬀerent question components. Compared to 
six existing models, DeepQR was able to more accurately identify ques-
tions that were low or high quality. Another study trained a state-of-the-
art language model, GPT-3, on learnersourced questions to classify the 
quality of a question as low or high and the cognitive level, according 
to Bloom’s revised taxonomy (Krathwohl, 2002, Moore, Nguyen, Bier, 
et al., 2022). They then had the model classify student-generated short 
answer questions to automatically classify their quality and cognitive 
level.
It is worth highlighting that the majority of existing work has fo-
cused on automatic evaluation of MCQs (Kurdi et al., 2020). However, 
the advancements in natural language processing (NLP) on pre-trained 
language models such as Bidirectional Encoder Representations from 
Transformers (BERT) (Devlin et al., 2018) and its extended models 
make it possible to generate and automatically detect the quality of con-
tent, which can also be tailored toward educational artefacts. Another 
limitation of the current AI-based evaluation methods is that they focus 
mostly on explicitly-deﬁned and semantic features rather than the cor-
rectness of the content. An interesting future direction is studying how 
AI and students can collaborate on content evaluation where the cor-
rectness of the content is examined by students and the readability and 
ﬂow is examined by AI.
2.2.3. Explainable and actionable evaluation methods
Much of the existing work on evaluating learnersourced content has 
focused on just separating out high and low quality resources (Abdi, 
Khosravi, Sadiq, Demartini, 2021). However, an important aspect of en-
gaging students in learnersourcing and evaluating their work is to help 
students not only improve their ability in content creation but also to 
help them develop their ability to monitor, evaluate and regulate their 
learning so that they can revise and enhance their created content. This 
--- Page 7 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
7
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
is of particular importance in the cases where learnersourcing activi-
ties are tied to assessment in which the assessed quality of a resource 
impacts student grades (Singh et al., 2021). In the case of using peer re-
view, an interesting future direction is to study how best practices from 
feedback literacy in terms of engaging authors and evaluators in dia-
logue (Ajjawi & Boud, 2017) and feedback loops (Carless, 2019) can 
be applied in learnersourcing. In the case of AI-based evaluation, the 
current use of deep learning methods for assessing the quality of edu-
cational artefacts such as MCQs has shown to be accurate and close to 
human judgement; however, the models operate as black boxes, provid-
ing no justiﬁcation for their decisions. An interesting future direction is 
to study how explainable AI methods in the context of education (Khos-
ravi et al., 2022) can be applied to learnersourcing.
2.3. Utilising learnersourced content
A side beneﬁt of engaging students in content creation and evalua-
tion is that it enables the development of large repositories of learning 
resources, which can be shared with students to provide practice oppor-
tunities (Singh et al., 2022). For instance, a plethora of studies describe 
the generation of large question banks across a variety of domains, and 
the production of millions of MCQs, that have been subsequently used 
for practice purposes Moore, Stamper, et al. (2022). However, the util-
ity of the developed repositories has often been limited to the courses 
where the content was originally produced, which restricts the life and 
impact of the created content. In addition, typically students only have 
access to simple search and ﬁltering functionality for the selection of 
practice questions. This may lead to students spending their time inef-
fectively on resources that are targeted toward an average student of 
the class rather than focusing on their knowledge gaps (Koedinger et 
al., 2013). This section explores how these limitations can be addressed 
so that SGC repositories can be more eﬀectively utilised. We ﬁrst dis-
cuss approaches for supporting personalisation in engaging with SGC 
repositories. Then we discuss how SGC repositories can have an impact 
beyond the course of their origin and to be utilised in future oﬀerings 
of diﬀerent courses across institutions.
2.3.1. Personalisation in engaging with content repositories
Learnersourcing yields student-generated artefacts, such as ques-
tions, but the process of students interacting with such learnersourcing 
activities and systems also generates auxiliary user-item-outcome data 
that can be leveraged for developing learner models (Abdi, 2022). A 
learner model is an abstract representation of a student’s knowledge 
state. They are a core component of adaptive educational systems that 
provide students with customised learning paths and adaptive feed-
back based on their learning process (Koedinger et al., 2013). In the 
case of modelling learners in learnersourcing, Moore, Nguyen, Stam-
per (2022b)a n d Abdi et al. (2019)h a v e utilised data collected from 
students’ interactions with a repository of SGC to model the knowl-
edge and skills required to solve problems in the context of chemistry, 
programming and relational databases courses. As the process of creat-
ing and evaluating content also leads to student learning, data captured 
during the learnersourcing activities can also be incorporated into these 
learner models akin to how student data from problem attempts is cur-
rently utilised. Empirical results from two studies that present learner 
models, which utilise data from students’ learnersourcing tasks, demon-
strate that these models outperform learner models that only utilise 
traditional assessment data (Abdi, Khosravi, Sadiq, 2020, Khosravi, De-
martini, et al., 2021). Educational recommender systems can make use 
of a learner model to recommend learning content, which can opti-
misestudent  learning and their time spent. For example, Khosravi et al. 
(2017)present  a new recommender system that recommends resources 
from an SGC repository. They found their approach to be able to ade-
quately provide personalised recommendations for students who have 
previously used the platform as well as cold start users who are new. 
Abdi, Khosravi, Sadiq, Gasevic (2020)r e p o r t that complementing rec-
ommendations on content from an SGC repository with a learner model 
lead to an increase in student engagement and a positive eﬀect on stu-
dents’ perceptions of the quality of the recommendations.
Another way to support personalisation, which is commonly referred 
to as step-loop or inner-loop adaptivity, is to enable an adaptive in-
structional system to provide support to learners within a particular 
learning task (e.g., hints or explanations they receive) based on their 
performance (Aleven et al., 2016). A project by Glassman et al. (2016)
designed a learnersourcing system to provide hints to students working 
through a college-level programming course. As students worked on 
the problem, they were able to automatically receive student-generated 
hints that would continually update or they could elect to only receive 
the hints when they requested them in a just-in-time fashion. This per-
sonalisation allowed students to leverage hints in a manner that ﬁt 
their preferences. They proposed two models for their hints. The ﬁrst 
is a push model, where the student-generated hints are presented to 
learners and constantly updated. The second is the pull model, where 
learners only receive hints when they request them. These two model 
approaches were extended by Singh et al. (2022)and  applied to broader 
learnersourcing applications. They indicate that the push model can 
be leveraged when the learnersourced artefact is intended to help the 
learners in the problem-solving process. On the other hand, the pull 
model should be utilisedwhen  the learners have completed a problem, 
but they might be seeking a more optimal solution. Another related 
system known as SolveDeep leverages student-generated sub-goals on 
algebra problems to provide feedback to other learners’ solutions, akin 
to providing a hint (Jin et al., 2019). They found that participants eﬀec-
tively leveraged the subgoals generated by other learners, which helped 
them eﬀectively and eﬃciently solve several algebra problems. Another 
example of supporting inner-loop adaptivity in learnersourcing comes 
from the popular Axis system (Williams et al., 2016), which enables 
students to generate explanations for math problems and then used 
adaptive multi-armed bandit algorithms to deploy the optimal expla-
nations to students. They found that explanations delivered to students 
led to higher learning gains than a majority of the existing explanations 
previously used for the problems.
2.3.2. Sharing learnersourcing contributions
A present challenge in the learnersourcing space is the sharing of 
SGC across courses, institutions, and ultimately to a broader audience. 
While eﬀorts in the open educational resources (OER) space provide in-
sights into the dissemination of instructional and assessment content, 
it is often content that is created by professional instructors that in-
tend to share their content (Wiley et al., 2014). Potential issues around 
copyright and the leaking of question bank answers create challenges on 
how we can readily share these materials in a way where they can eﬀec-
tively be used for both formative and summative assessments of student 
learning. Platforms such as OpenStax and ASSISSTments, popular OER 
platforms, attempt to address such challenges by requiring instructors 
to verify their identity before accessing the materials (Pitt, 2015, Hef-
fernan & Heﬀernan, 2014). Researchers and practitioners continue to 
expand their eﬀorts in sharing learnersourcing contributions from their 
courses and systems. For example, Quintana et al. (2018)h a v e stu-
dents in a data science course develop questions that were then utilised 
by students in future semesters of the same course. In the context of 
MOOCs, (Kim et al., 2014) and (Weir et al., 2015) learnersourced labels 
for instructional videos that were leveraged by learners across multiple 
courses. (Kay et al., 2020) explore how students sharing resources and 
learnersourcing across multiple institutions can eﬀectively be handled. 
Nevertheless, approaches and adoption of methods that support sharing 
learnersourced contributions are under-researched and -explored.
Even when the learnersourced content is created at a single institu-
tion, factors such as the student demographics and their location may 
impact how SGC is utilised (Moore, Nguyen, Bier, et al., 2023) Morales-
Martinez et al. (2020)investigated  how students at the same institution, 
--- Page 8 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
8
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
but split geographically between campuses in the United Kingdom and 
China, perceived the SGC of their peers. They found that when the stu-
dents were identiﬁable, it had a signiﬁcant impact on how their content 
was accessed and rated by their peers, such as students intentionally 
avoiding content created by classmates of certain nationalities. Other 
work in the space had more positive results, as Denny et al. (2012)
had students in an introductory programming course at an institution 
in New Zealand generate learning resources for students in a simi-
lar course in Canada. The results indicated that this cross-institutional 
learnersourcing worked as well as it previously did within-institution 
and students from both institutions indicating that they prefer their con-
tributions be shared more widely.
2.4. Overseeing the creation of learnersourced content
The role of the instructor in the learnersourcing process can vary de-
pending on what system they might be using, how they elect to utilise 
the SGC in their course, or what they want to gain by having students 
participate in learnersourcing (Khosravi, Demartini, et al., 2021). No 
matter their role, they have a form of oversight in the learnersourc-
ing process that enables them to gain insights and ultimately facilitate 
student learning. While in theory learnersourcing systems can oper-
ate without the presence of an instructor, academic oversight of the 
creation and evaluation process can serves as a demonstration of re-
liability, providing assurance to both educators and students that the 
system is trustworthy and dependable and to encourage high-quality 
contributions and peer reviews (Darvishi et al., 2023). It also provides 
useful insights into the student learning process that instructors can act 
on, such as modifying their curriculum based on where students have 
diﬃculty or having students create questions over a particular content 
area. Additionally, as the size of both in-person and online courses in-
creases, resulting in increased student-generated contributions, it can 
be challenging for instructors to eﬀectively use their time in evaluating 
and utilising these resources (Ji et al., 2022). While the role of the in-
structor is under-explored in the learnersourcing literature, work in the 
related ﬁelds of learning analytics, crowdsourcing, and machine learn-
ing can provide valuable insights that can be adopted in this context.
2.4.1. Learning analytics and actionable insights
Imagine a tool that is supporting engagement with learnersourcing 
for a class with over 500 students. How can the teaching team make 
sense of students’ engagement and performance and how can they ef-
fectively facilitate learning? Data, in addition to the content, generated 
from learnersourcing activities can readily be leveraged by analytic 
systems and learning analytics dashboards (Matcha et al., 2019) with 
actionable insights (Jørnø & Gynther, 2018) to help instructors make 
sense of student learning and intervene with pedagogical interventions 
as necessary.
This raises the question of what metrics and analytics can be ob-
tained from learnersourcing that instructors might ﬁnd insightful. Gen-
eral metrics such as the number of logins, resources created, evaluated 
and attempted are readily available (see the case studies from Section3) 
which might give instructors a sense of student engagement. Research 
has shown that student participation and completion are key indica-
tors to increased learning (Moore, Nguyen, Stamper, 2022a). Studies 
also show that interaction with learnersourcing activities is not con-
stant across student populations. The 90-9-1 rule was noted to apply 
in learnersourcing (Khosravi, Demartini, et al., 2021), stating that 90% 
of users are lurkers, 9% create some content, but the majority is cre-
ated by 1% of the student population, which is similar to participation 
in forums within online courses. Engagement analytics may lead to in-
structor actions of congratulating high-achieving students and sending 
nudges and reminders to inactive students (Plak et al., 2023). Systems, 
such as RiPPLE, have also provided a type of learning analytics dash-
board that can be leveraged by instructors to view questions students 
are struggling with or content areas where students may require addi-
tional support (Khosravi, Demartini, et al., 2021). Through the use of 
such analytics, students could then be encouraged to generate content in 
these troublesome areas, which could result in them thinking critically 
about the area, while also having the beneﬁt of generating additional 
practice questions. In addition, performance data on students’ interac-
tions with assessment items can be leveraged to model student learning 
(Abdi, Khosravi, Sadiq, 2020, Kay et al., 2020) and to infer the qual-
ity of assessment items (Huang et al., 2021). More ﬁne-grained data 
about the sequence of activities conducted by students can be lever-
aged to identify underlying tactics and strategies (Matcha et al., 2020) 
that are used by students while engaged in learnersourcing (Lahza et 
al., 2023). Another use case of actionable analytics for learnersouric-
ing systems is to help instructors ﬁnd resources or peer-review cases for 
being spot-checked which is discussed next.
2.4.2. Evaluating/spot-checking
Peer evaluation is an essential component of learnersourcing, as stu-
dents commonly review the contributions of their peers within the same 
course or even across multiple institutions (Darvishi et al., 2021). How-
ever, peer evaluation is often susceptible to students being unmotivated 
to evaluate the work of their peers in a diligent manner (Liu & Chen, 
2016). To make the peer review process more reliable, one potential 
approach is to utilise spot-checking, where an instructor or tutor eval-
uates some assignments and oﬀers a reward to students who grade in 
a similarly diligent manner (Cambre et al., 2018). Various metrics may 
be utilised for optimally determining the resources which would beneﬁt 
from spot checking the most. Gao et al. (2019)show  that even random 
spot checking can incentivisereviewers  to be more diligent. Wang et al. 
(2020)t a k e a game theoretic approach to suggest optimal spot-checks 
to maximise the evaluation accuracy of reviews. Darvishi, Khosravi, 
Sadiq, et al. (2022)u s e a range of human-driven metrics (e.g., high-
disagreement in moderation evaluations, a high ratio of downvotes in 
comparison to upvotes) and data-driven metrics (e.g., assessment items 
that have a low discrimination index or questionable distractors where 
the popular answer is not the one proposed by the author) in the context 
of learnersourcing to categorise resources into having high, medium, 
low or no priority for being reviewed.
It is worth noting that an alternative or complementary strategy to 
spot checking is to incorporate calibration submissions (Wang et al., 
2020) for which the true grade is known. These submissions can be 
used for training where reviewers would have access to how an expert 
would have graded the task. A side beneﬁt is that they can be used to 
infer the reliability of a reviewer. Relatedly, previous work by Hamer et 
al. (2005)has  also explored a technical approach to this spot-checking 
problem, using algorithms to calibrate peer review scores automati-
cally. Their approach identiﬁes “rogue” reviewers that appear to assign 
their scores arbitrarily. Scores provided by these reviewers are weighted 
lower when the computed aggregate score for the artefact under review 
is determined.
2.4.3. Human-in-the-loop
When it comes to AI and machine learning, human judgement is 
still needed to make sense of or improve the results of the AI (Divate & 
Salgaonkar, 2017). This is one area where learnersourcing can be lever-
aged and the proposed framework can provide the insights to make it 
work. Human judgement and human-in-the-loop becomes even more 
important when we move away from traditional measures of educa-
tional achievement and focus on issues around fairness, accountability, 
transparency and ethics (or FATE), which was the focus of a recent 
special issue journal that had a common theme among the papers – 
that humans are still necessary “in the AI loop” to manage these issues 
(Woolf, 2022).
In a number of systems, AI guides the use of learnersourced con-
tent with human input. One example is AXIS (Williams et al., 2016), 
which uses multi-arm bandit methods to choose which student gener-
--- Page 9 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
9
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
ated explanations to give students who need help. In this system, there 
is the opportunity for students to provide ratings on the explanations. 
These ratings and the future success of students on similar problems are 
combined to give the highest rated and best performing explanations a 
higher probability to be seen by future students.
One emerging area where human oversight may be needed in future 
learnersourcing systems is with the use of generative language mod-
els. Sarsa et al. (2022)propose  the idea of robosourcing, where content 
generated by language models can be used as a starting point for stu-
dents to accelerate the learnersourcing process. On the one hand, the 
increasing automation supported by such models may suggest less need 
for human input, but there is a need for caution. In their review of 
the opportunities and risks oﬀered by foundation models, Bommasani 
et al. (2021) explicitly warn against the removal of teachers from the 
loop. Large language models are trained on broad data produced by 
humans, and thus are known to suﬀer from biases similar to humans 
(Chan, 2023). Using automatically generated content as the basis for 
learnersourcing tasks runs the risk of perpetuating some of these biases. 
We see a human-in-the-loop approach, involving both students and in-
structors, as essential for moderating such biases and for improving and 
tailoring the performance of the underlying generative models for suit-
ability in learnersourcing contexts.
3. Case study
In this section, we present two comprehensive case studies that illus-
trate the application of our proposed framework. Section3.1discusses a 
pioneering learnersourcing system, PeerWise, and Section3.2describes 
a state-of-the-art learnersourcing system, RiPPLE, in the context of the 
proposed framework.
3.1. PeerWise
PeerWise (Denny et al., 2008) is a web-based learnersourcing tool, 
ﬁrst developed in 2008, which supports students in creating, publishing, 
answering and discussing MCQs. As of the time of writing, approxi-
mately 7,000,000 questions have been published by students at 3,000 
institutions worldwide.2 Organisationally, the content within PeerWise 
is arranged hierarchically into “institutions” and “courses”. Typically, 
an instructor would create a new course repository associated with 
their institution, and then grant their students access to that repository. 
Instructors and students use the same interface, although additional fea-
tures are available for instructors to provide oversight, such as running 
basic usage reports and managing access permissions. Fig.3 shows an 
example from the perspective of a student of the main menu for one 
course repository. Questions are organised with respect to whether they 
have been authored or answered by the student. The user interface of 
PeerWise keeps student identities anonymous, which is a deliberate de-
sign choice that has been shown to reduce certain kinds of biases in 
online learning environments (Morales-Martinez et al., 2020).
Instructors can also access ﬁne-grained data for their courses, which 
includes timestamped records of all student interactions. The avail-
ability of this data has facilitated the work of educational researchers 
exploring various aspects of learnersourcing. To date, 123 articles by 
262 distinct authors have been published using data collected by Peer-
Wise.3 Much of this work has focused on learning eﬀects. For example, 
Kay, Hardy and Galloway used multilevel modelling to analyse data 
from 3,000 students over three years and across 18 physics, chemistry 
and biology courses at three UK universities (Kay et al., 2020). When 
controlling for prior ability, they found a signiﬁcant positive association 
between students’ engagement with PeerWise and their performance on 
end of course exams. They conclude that PeerWise oﬀers a “low-risk” 
2 peerwise .org.
3 https://peerwise .cs .auckland .ac .nz /docs /publications/.
Fig. 2. OverviewofPeerWise.
Fig. 3. MainmenuofPeerWise.
and “low-cost” intervention that supports student learning and, more 
generally, that learnersourcing of course material in a structured way 
can provide measurable educational beneﬁts.
Fig. 2 provides an overview of the operation of PeerWise with re-
spect to our framework. We elaborate on each part of the framework in 
the following sections.
3.1.1. Create in PeerWise
The multiple-choice question (MCQ) format is simple, widely used 
in practice, and is a familiar format to most students. When construct-
ing an MCQ in PeerWise, a student provides a question stem (a short 
section of text that describes the problem to be solved), a set of possible 
answer options (between two and ﬁve alternatives are allowed, exactly 
one of which must be selected as the correct answer) and an explanation
(detailing the answer to the question and optionally explaining why cer-
tain alternative answers are incorrect). Fig.5illustrates an example of 
the stem, options and explanation for a question published by a student 
in an introductory MATLAB programming course.
As soon as a student publishes a question to the course repository, 
it is available to all other students in the course to answer and evalu-
ate. That is, there is no formal validation or evaluation step prior to the 
--- Page 10 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
10
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Fig. 4. Exampleofusingalargelanguagemodeltoaidthecreationprocess.
question being visible to other students. To assist students in ﬁnding 
questions of interest during utilisation of large question banks for prac-
tice, question authors are able to assign topic “tags” to their questions 
which can be used for searching the question bank.
One obvious human-AI partnership that can enhance the “create” 
activity in a learnersourcing environment is the use of a large language 
model, such as GPT-4, to provide automatic guidance to an author gen-
erating content. Consider, for example, a student using PeerWise to 
create a multiple-choice question as shown in the upper left portion 
of Fig.4. As soon as the author of this question has crafted the question 
stem and indicated the correct answer, these two elements can be incor-
porated into a simple prompt (shown on the upper right of Fig.4) and 
sent automatically to a large language model (in this example, GPT-4 
is used). The response from the model, shown in the bottom portion of 
Fig. 4, presents three possible distractors for this question. These can 
then be presented to the student to help them craft an eﬀective ques-
tion. In this particular example, the question was already published and 
the responses selected by students utilising the question are illustrated 
by the red and blue histograms in the “First answers” and “Conﬁrmed 
answers” columns, but naturally this data would not be available to the 
author at the time of writing the question. Note that the ﬁrst distrac-
tor suggested by the language model, “habituation”, actually turns out 
to be the most eﬀective distractor in practice (i.e. the incorrect option 
selected by more than 20% of students attempting this question). The 
fact that this option was not provided to the language model as part of 
the prompt indicates that it is able to formulate suggestions that have 
utility. The other suggested distractors may have proven more eﬀec-
tive, had they been used, than the current distractors which were rarely 
selected.
3.1.2. Evaluate in PeerWise
Any student may evaluate any of the questions in the question bank, 
however they must ﬁrst attempt the question by submitting an answer. 
Submitted answers are assessed through comparison with the question 
author’s suggested answer, and the answers submitted to the question 
by other students. PeerWise generates one of seven possible feedback 
responses each time an answer is submitted. For example, if the submit-
ted answer matches the author’s suggested answer and that is also the 
most popular answer selected by other students, then the feedback re-
Fig. 5. Exampleofquestionstem,optionsandexplanation.
sponse includes a solid green tick and a short descriptor message. An 
answer is deemed incorrect, and denoted by a solid red cross, if that 
answer diﬀers from the author’s suggested answer yet the suggested an-
swer is the most popular answer selected by other students. Variations 
to this feedback, with appropriate descriptors, are shown when there 
is mixed agreement between the submitted, author’s and most popular 
answer.
After submitting an answer and receiving this feedback, students 
are also shown the question author’s explanation and a histogram of 
the options selected by other students. At this stage, a student can add a 
comment to the comment thread for the question, and they can evaluate 
the question by submitting a rating for its diﬃculty (3-point scale) and 
quality (6-point scale). There is also an option to “ﬂag” any question 
--- Page 11 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
11
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Fig. 6. Answer histogram showing distribution of selected responses and com-
ment thread.
deemed inappropriate, which will bring it to the attention of the course 
instructor facilitating their oversight role. Finally, in light of seeing the 
feedback and discussion on the question, the student can optionally 
submit a “conﬁrmed” answer which indicates the option they believe 
is correct. Alongside the ratings, response histograms and comments, 
these conﬁrmed answers serve to improve the quality of the feedback 
students receive when utilising the resource for practice. Fig. 6 shows 
an example of the answer histogram for a question in a cellular biology 
course (with initial question attempts shown in red, and “conﬁrmed” 
answers in blue), and a short excerpt from the comment thread to a 
question in a computer architecture course.
3.1.3. Utilise in PeerWise
The prior evaluation step provides two mechanisms for helping stu-
dents locate high quality questions when utilising the repository for 
practice. Firstly, the diﬃculty and quality ratings are aggregated and 
can be used directly by a student to avoid low quality questions and to 
select questions at a suitable level of diﬃculty. Secondly, after evalu-
ating a question a student can choose to “follow” the question author 
if they ﬁnd the question was particularly helpful. Consistent with the 
anonymous interface design, students do not know the identities of the 
authors when choosing who to follow, and instead must make quality 
judgements on the basis of the content. Once following a particular au-
thor, a student gains access to all of the other questions that author has 
created in a separate section of the tool. As a way of incentivising the 
authoring of useful questions, students can see how many of their peers 
are following them.
A common use of question repositories in PeerWise is for review 
and practice purposes leading up to summative tests and exams. Prior 
work has shown that answering activity in PeerWise typically increases 
rapidly before a test (Denny, 2015), and that answering questions is 
strongly predictive of subsequent test performance (Denny et al., 2018, 
Snow et al., 2019). Instructors are also able to make use of the ques-
tions, for example by reviewing a question repository to identify topics 
that are challenging for students, or by selecting high-quality questions 
for use on summative tests and exams. For example, Huang et al. (2021)
showed that with some basic coaching, students using PeerWise were 
Fig. 7. OverviewofRiPPLE.
able to produce many questions that performed just as well when used 
on high-stakes exams as questions authored by academics.
3.1.4. Oversight in PeerWise
PeerWise was originally inspired by the contributing student ap-
proach described by (Hamer, 2006), and thus takes the view that stu-
dents are primarily responsible for both producing and moderating the 
resources. As such, instructor oversight of the learnersourcing process 
is fairly minimal.
To provide some initial structure for students when authoring ques-
tions, instructors can deﬁne a set of “course tags” which are topics that 
are shown to students during the authoring step at the point they are 
prompted to tag their question. Deﬁning these tags can help to minimise 
fragmentation of topics. Instructors can also post “administrator com-
ments” as part of the comment thread for any question. Such comments 
are highlighted as being posted by the instructor, and appear separately 
from student written comments.
Students can, of course, edit their own questions but cannot edit 
questions written by other students. They are limited to providing feed-
back via a question’s comment thread or ﬂagging questions, at the time 
of rating, that they deem are inappropriate. Instructors have the ability 
to edit or delete questions in the repository, and can review questions 
which have low quality ratings or which have been ﬂagged by students.
3.2. RiPPLE
A full description of RiPPLE is provided in Khosravi et al. (2019). 
Here, we provide a brief description based on our proposed learn-
ersourcing framework presented in Fig. 1. At its core, RiPPLE is an 
adaptive educational system that relies on learnersourcing for content 
creation. RiPPLE can be used as a standalone system or be integrated 
into many popular LMSs using the Learning Tools Interoperability (LTI) 
standard. RiPPLE supports two types of roles: instructors and students. 
To use the system in a course, an instructor creates a RiPPLE oﬀering 
and adds a set of topics, and optionally imports resources from other 
RiPPLE oﬀerings. This enables instructors to import resources from their 
past oﬀerings as well as share resources with other instructors with or 
outside their institution. In RiPPLE, students own the intellectual prop-
erty rights of any content that they create and are free to share their 
content with others as they desire. However, to enable students to ben-
eﬁt from each other’s contributions, the terms and conditions of using 
the platform request students to provide a non-exclusive licence to host, 
use, distribute, modify, run, copy and publicly display their content.
Since 2018, RiPPLE has been used in over 150 course oﬀerings with 
over 30k students who have created over 80k resources which have 
received over 300k peer reviews. Fig. 7 provides an overview of the 
--- Page 12 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
12
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Fig. 8. CreationinRiPPLE.
operation of RiPPLE with respect to our framework. We elaborate on 
each part of the framework in the following sections.
3.2.1. Create in RiPPLE
Both students and instructors can create learning resources in RiP-
PLE. Originally, similar to many other learnersourcing systems, RiPPLE 
only supported the creation of MCQs. However, during the last few 
years, as demonstrated by Fig.8(a), we have added support for the cre-
ation of various other educational resource types such as ﬂashcards, 
hotspots, worked examples as well as short and long answer questions. 
Based on popular demand from instructors, we have also included re-
source types such as reﬂections, research reports and project reports, 
which allow students to share original contributions that are not di-
rectly related to covering content from a course curriculum. Fig. 8(b) 
illustrates the interface used for creating a worked example. Students 
are asked to identify the topic(s) associated with the resource, its level 
of diﬃculty, and it’s corresponding position within Bloom’s revised tax-
onomy of learning objectives (Krathwohl, 2002). Given that we expect 
not all students to be familiar with this taxonomy, the platform pro-
vides a description and an example resource for each level of learning. 
Fig.8(c)-(e) show the interfaces and the provided best practice tips for 
writing the question, steps and a sample solution.
3.2.2. Evaluate in RiPPLE
Resources created by students go through a formal peer-review pro-
cess (Darvishi et al., 2021). Upon availability of a student to peer review 
a resource (i.e., the student goes on the moderation tab on the plat-
form), RiPPLE selects and presents a non-evaluated resource to the 
student. Each resource type has an associated rubric for evaluation, and 
these rubrics share a similar structure. All rubrics have a set of cri-
teria, a statement capturing the evaluators’ perceptions of the overall 
quality of the resource, a statement capturing their conﬁdence in their 
judgement and written feedback to justify their decisions. However, 
speciﬁc details the underlying criteria for evaluating various resource 
types have changed over time. The initial version of the rubric, shown 
in Fig. 9(a), used a Likert scale to capture students’ responses to cri-
teria (alignment with course content, correctness and coherence of the 
resource), decision and conﬁdence level. Analysis of more than 40,000 
student evaluations based on this rubric revealed that it led students to 
lenient marking as over half of the students provided the highest quality 
rating to the resources.4
We also noticed that the average length of the provided comments 
was only eight words, which meant very little support was provided for 
their judgement. To address some of these shortcomings, we updated 
the rubric to what is shown in Fig. 9(b). This rubric included addi-
tional criteria that referred to the appropriate level of diﬃculty and 
critical thinking. In addition, we moved away from Likert scale state-
ments, which are commonly used to capture perceptions in surveys, to 
words that refer to the quality of outcome ranging from poor to out-
standing, which is more commonly used in rubrics. Finally, the updated 
rubric speciﬁcally asked students to justify their decision and provide 
feedback rather than just having space for a comment without speciﬁc 
instructions. Analysis of more than 30,000 student evaluations based on 
the updated rubric showed a signiﬁcant shift in their responses where 
the most common rating response moved from the highest rating (5) to 
the second highest rating (4). The mean length of the associated com-
ments supporting the quality ratings also increased to 13 words.
Fig. 9(c) illustrates the next main update to the rubric, described 
in (Darvishi, Khosravi, Abdi, et al., 2022), which aimed to improve 
4 Informed consent from students and approval from The University of 
Queensland Human Research Ethics Committee was received for reporting ag-
gregated stats on human participants’ engagement.
--- Page 13 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
13
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Fig. 9. EvaluateinRiPPLE.
the quality of the provided feedback. Informed by higher education 
research, we built a set of training materials (accessible by click-
ing on the? button next to where they justify their response) and a 
self-monitoring checklist for students to consider while writing their 
reviews. We also developed natural language processing-based qual-
ity control functions that automatically assess feedback submitted and 
prompt students to improve, if necessary. Analysis of over 190,000 stu-
dent evaluations based on this rubric indicated that we were successful 
in almost doubling the length of the provided feedback from an average 
of 13 to 25 words.
Fig. 9 (d) shows the current version of the rubric on the platform 
which has recently been deployed. This incorporates two new changes. 
The ﬁrst change is that each criterion can now be accompanied by a list 
of items for the reviewer to consider in their evaluation. This change al-
lows the platform or instructors to provide more elaborate guidelines for 
a reviewer’s consideration. The second change has introduced scaﬀold-
ing to the feedback part where instead of writing one block of feedback 
students now provide a list of positive aspects about the resources fol-
lowed by a list of suggestions. They can then provide further comments, 
if necessary. This change was introduced as the feedback from many 
reviewers was generic in nature and did not include constructive sug-
gestions on how the resource can be improved. Analysis of the impact 
of this new rubric is underway. Early results based on over 4,000 re-
sponses are included in Fig.9(d).
A feedback and evaluation outcome interface (as shown in Fig.10), 
shares the results with the author and the reviewers, asking them to vote 
on the helpfulness of the evaluations and determine whether or not they 
agree with the outcome (approved or denied). We have collected ore 
than 30,000 responses since the interface was added to the platform. It 
is encouraging to see that students generally trust the system; only 2% 
of the responses disagreed with the outcomes of the peer assessment 
process and fewer than 4% mentioned they were unsure (see the work 
of Darvishi, Khosravi, Sadiq, et al. (2022)for  more details).
3.2.3. Utilise in RiPPLE
Fig.11illustrates the interface used for providing personalised prac-
tice opportunities for students. The top part of the ﬁgure represents an 
interactive visualisation widget, in the form of an open learner model 
(Bull, 2020, Abdi, Khosravi, Sadiq, Darvishi, 2021), that allows stu-
dents to view an abstract representation of their knowledge state based 
--- Page 14 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
14
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Fig. 10. FeedbackinRiPPLE.
Fig. 11. TheopenlearnermodelandrecommendationinterfaceinRiPPLE.
on a set of topics associated with a course oﬀering. The colour of the 
bars, determined by the underlying algorithm modelling the student, 
categorises competence into three levels. Namely, for a particular unit 
of knowledge, red, yellow and green signify inadequate competence, 
adequate competence with room for improvement, and mastery, re-
spectively. Currently, RiPPLE employs an Elo-based rating system for 
approximating the knowledge state of users with the results translated 
into coloured bars (Abdi, Khosravi, Sadiq, 2020). The lower part of the 
screen displays learning content from the repository of approved re-
sources that are recommended to a student based on their learning 
needs using the recommender system outlined in (Khosravi et al., 2017). 
At a high level, this system recommends easier content on topics where 
students are developing mastery and harder content on topics for which 
students have already developed mastery. Students also have the abil-
ity to search for resources based on various criteria such as the resource 
type, topics and diﬃculty.
--- Page 15 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
15
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Fig. 12. WeeklyinsightsinRiPPLE.
3.2.4. Oversight in RiPPLE
One of the main design guidelines of RiPPLE is to ensure that it 
optimally uses the minimal availability of instructors. To do so, RiP-
PLE has an instructor landing page, shown in Fig. 12. The top part 
of the page displays statistics based on overall use and use from the 
previous week on study sessions as well as resources created, evalu-
ated and answered. It then provides information about the completion 
status for the latest round of assessment and weekly highlights about 
students’ achievements and popular resources. One of the main ways we 
have tried to optimally use instructor time is to add suggested actions. 
RiPPLE currently provides ﬁve types of suggested actions including 
inspecting resources that beneﬁt the most from academic judgement, 
reviewing evaluations that are ﬂagged as ineﬀective, submitting assess-
ment grades, nudging at-risk students (e.g., those who have not logged 
in or completed assessment) and congratulating high achievers on their 
achievements. The bottom of the page includes an analytical toolbox 
that provides answers to a list of questions in relation to students’ per-
formance and engagement. For each of the questions instructors can 
set the start and end date for data being reported to view class-level 
or individual-level trends using various visualisation types (e.g., bar 
charts, box plots).
Fig. 13 shows the underlying interface for two of the main sug-
gested actions, namely inspecting resources and reviewing evaluations. 
Fig.13(a) shows the RiPPLE interface for inspecting resources that have 
been approved but are likely to be incorrect or ineﬀective. At a high 
level, it employs a range of human-driven metrics (e.g., high disagree-
ment in reviews, a high ratio of downvotes in comparison to upvotes) 
and data-driven metrics (e.g., assessment items that have a low discrim-
ination index or questionable distractors where the popular answer is 
not the one proposed by the author) to categorise resources into having 
high, medium, low or no priority for being reviewed. RiPPLE uses ab-
solute and relative points of comparison to help instructors make sense 
of why a resource has been ﬂagged for review (e.g., “disagreements be-
tween student ratings for this resource are 2.8 times higher than average 
of the course”).
Fig. 13(b) shows the RiPPLE interface for searching the reviews. It 
enables instructors to set a date range to identify reviews with a par-
ticular word count range on a particular set of topics. In addition, we 
use the functions outlined in (Darvishi, Khosravi, Abdi, et al., 2022) to 
enable instructors to identify whether or not reviews include a sugges-
tion. Once instructors select a set of reviews, they can apply one of the 
following actions: upvote it to provide positive feedback; ignore it so 
that it wouldn’t show up in the search again; downvote it and provide 
feedback on its ineﬀectiveness; or ﬁnally remove the review so that it 
wouldn’t count towards meeting assessment requirements for the re-
viewer.
4. Challenges and implications for practice and research
The adoption of our learnersourcing framework may lead to certain 
considerations that need to be addressed with care. This section elabo-
rates on these challenges and implications, and also pinpoints areas that 
call for further exploration and research.
The process of educating students to become proﬁcient creators and 
evaluators of content, along with the duty of content creation itself, are 
tasks that demand considerable time. Therefore educators that are con-
sidering taking on learnersourcing may need to think about how these 
responsibilities can be balanced against other academic commitments 
in their course to avoid overloading students. Moreover, some students 
may not fully understand or appreciate the advantages of learnersourc-
--- Page 16 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
16
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Fig. 13. ResourceandpeerreviewinspectioninRiPPLE.Thenameofstudentshasredactedintheﬁgure.
ing. Thus, incentivising them to participate may necessitate educators 
to explicitly discuss the beneﬁts and rationale for its inclusion in their 
curriculum. Empirical studies focusing on the most eﬀective strategies 
for incetivising students and training them in content creation, as well 
as assessing the impact of these strategies on student engagement, out-
comes, and the quality of resources produced, could provide substantial 
insights for eﬀective adoption of learnersourcing.
The utilisation of AI assistance to aid students in content creation 
and evaluation is a potentially beneﬁcial and promising strategy. How-
ever, if employed without care, it may lead to overdependence, where 
students might excessively rely on large language models to create and 
evaluate content on their behalf. This could result in several negative 
outcomes, such as content lacking originality, not aligning with course 
material, or simply being factually incorrect. The design, development 
and validation of interfaces and scaﬀolds incorporating large language 
model APIs into learnersourcing systems, to help students more eﬀec-
tively contribute, presents a promising ﬁeld of future research.
While the frameworks include multiple strategies to optimise the 
utilisation of the instructor’s eﬀorts, a certain level of monitoring is 
still required to identify misbehaviour such as carrying out detrimental 
peer reviews, plagiarising content, or creating inappropriate resources. 
This monitoring not only serves as a means of maintaining content 
and behavioural standards, but also serves as a demonstration of re-
liability, providing assurance to both educators and students that the 
system is trustworthy and dependable. In more minor cases, the cre-
ated content may lack relevance or have large coverage gaps based on 
the course objectives. These actions could undermine students’ trust in 
learnersourcing and seeing its beneﬁts. The design, development and 
validation of strategies that provide actionable insights and pedagogical 
interventions that best assist educators in facilitating learning, identify-
ing students who require assistance and overseeing the creation and 
evaluation of contributions of students in learnersourcing systems, all 
while demonstrating their reliability, hold substantial potential for fu-
ture research
Utilising models that foster content co-creation among several stu-
dents might provide the dual advantages of promoting collaborative 
learning and enhancing the quality of content produced. However, this 
approach is also prone to issues such as group dynamic conﬂicts, free-
riding, ensuring fairness in grading, and evaluating individual contribu-
tions which are inherent to group-based learning and assessment tasks. 
Educators may need to think about approaches for dealing with such 
conﬂicts if they are considering enabling multi-student learnersourced 
submissions.
5. Conclusion
Widespread changes to learning and teaching alongside rapid 
growth in the use of digital tools in education and the vast data they 
collect are presenting new opportunities for the application of artiﬁcial 
intelligence in the classroom. One activity that appears uniquely placed 
to beneﬁt is learnersourcing. Given that it is primarily student-driven, 
artiﬁcial models of intelligence can be employed to enable students 
to develop transformative competencies, such as creating new value, 
developing self-and  co-agency skills and improving the learning expe-
rience while reducing the need for instructor expertise and oversight.
This paper introduced a framework that considers the existing learn-
ersourcing literature, the latest insights from the learning sciences and 
advances in AI to oﬀer a blueprint for developing learnersourcing sys-
tems. The framework is presented in the form of questions that corre-
spond to creating content, evaluating the quality of the created content, 
considerations for how learnersourced contributions can be utilised and 
the role of instructors in facilitating learning via learnersourcing.
A common theme across all four dimensions is the need for human-
AI partnerships for advancing learnersourcing. In terms of content cre-
ation and evaluation, advances in NLP and generative models provide 
space for AI to play a fundamental role in the co-creation of content 
with humans and to assist with the automated evaluation of its quality. 
For utilising learnersourcing content, the use of AI can help in devel-
oping explainable recommender systems that model students’ mastery 
and assist them in engaging with content that best suits their learn-
ing needs. Finally, which respect to oversight, AI can partner with 
instructors to help them optimally use their time in reviewing content 
that beneﬁts the most from their judgement and assisting students that 
need their help. To maintain a clear connection between the discussion 
and the literature pertaining to each dimension of the framework, we 
have included discussion points within the sections where they are pre-
sented. The two presented case studies demonstrate the application of 
our framework in the context of two vastly diﬀerent and well-adopted 
learnersourcing systems.
Despite a long history of exploration, the development and large-
scale adoption of learnersourcing systems are still in their early stages 
and much more fundamental work is needed before they can achieve 
their full potential. We call upon the educational research and prac-
titioner communities to review and critique our framework and to 
contribute to advancing the ﬁeld through the development of scien-
tiﬁcally grounded and empirically validated systems that can help in 
accelerating the development and adoption of learnersourcing. In rela-
tion to human-AI partnership for creating and evaluating content, we 
highlight many opportunities, but there is still much that needs to be 
done for this vision to reach its full potential. On the educational side, 
there is a need for preparing students and instructors for collaboration 
with AI, which requires large-scale upskilling and training programs in 
data and digital literacy. There is also a need for conducting educational 
research to determine the eﬀect size of various human-AI partnerships 
in creating content on student learning. Relative to social science, there 
is a need for developing new policies that assign ownership of content 
--- Page 17 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
17
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
and copyright among human and AI collaborators in a fair manner. On 
the technical side, more eﬀective methods of assisting humans in the 
create, evaluate, utilise and oversight processes are required. In par-
ticular, development of discipline-focused large language models may 
strengthen the quality of novel educational content AI can create. Fi-
nally, in relation to ethics, there is a need for exploring spot-checking 
and human-in-the-loop models that fairly treat all students and gives 
them equal opportunity for learning and receiving feedback.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.
References
Abdi, S. (2022). Learner models for learnersourced adaptive educational systems. Ph.D. 
thesis, The University of Queensland.
Abdi, S., Khosravi, H., & Sadiq, S. (2020). Modelling learners in crowdsourcing educa-
tional systems.In International conference on artiﬁcial intelligence in education(pp.3–9). 
Springer.
Abdi, S., Khosravi, H., Sadiq, S., & Darvishi, A. (2021). Open learner models for multi-
activity educational systems. In International conference on artiﬁcial intelligence in 
education(pp.11–17). Springer.
Abdi, S., Khosravi, H., Sadiq, S., & Demartini, G. (2021). Evaluating the quality of learning 
resources: A learnersourcing approach. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 14, 
81–92. https://doi .org /10 .1109 /TLT .2021 .3058644.
Abdi, S., Khosravi, H., Sadiq, S., & Gasevic, D. (2019). A multivariate elo-based learner 
model for adaptive educational systems. In Proc. educational data mining conf.
(pp.462–467).
Abdi, S., Khosravi, H., Sadiq, S., & Gasevic, D. (2020). Complementing educational rec-
ommender systems with open learner models.In Proc. 10th int. conf. learning analytics 
knowledge(pp.360–365).
Ajjawi, R., & Boud, D. (2017). Researching feedback dialogue: An interactional analysis 
approach. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 42, 252–265. https://doi .org /
10 .1080 /02602938 .2015 .1102863.
Aleven, V., McLaren, B. M., Sewall, J., Van Velsen, M., Popescu, O., Demi, S., Ringenberg, 
M., & Koedinger, K. R. (2016). Example-tracing tutors: Intelligent tutor development 
for non-programmers. International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education, 26, 
224–269. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s40593 -015 -0088 -2.
Antin, J. (2011). My kind of people? Perceptions about Wikipedia contributors and their 
motivations. InProceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing 
systems(pp.3411–3420).
Bada, S. O., & Olusegun, S. (2015). Constructivism learning theory: A paradigm for 
teaching and learning. Journal of Research & Method in Education, 5, 66–70. https://
doi .org /10 .29322 /IJSRP .12 .12 .2022 .p13211.
Bates, S. P., Galloway, R. K., Riise, J., & Homer, D. (2014). Assessing the quality of a 
student-generated question repository. Physical Review Special Topics-Physics Education 
Research, 10, Article020105.  https://doi .org /10 .1103 /PhysRevSTPER .10 .020105.
Bernstein, M. S., Little, G., Miller, R. C., Hartmann, B., Ackerman, M. S., Karger, D. R., 
Crowell, D., & Panovich, K. (2010). Soylent: A word processor with a crowd inside.In
Proceedings of the 23rd annualACM  symposium on user interface software and technology
(pp.313–322).
Bhatnagar, S., Zouaq, A., Desmarais, M. C., & Charles, E. (2020). Learnersourcing quality 
assessment of explanations for peer instruction.InC.  Alario-Hoyos, M. J. Rodríguez-
Triana, M. Scheﬀel, I. Arnedillo-Sánchez, & S. M. Dennerlein (Eds.), Addressing global 
challenges and quality education(pp.144–157). Cham: Springer International Publish-
ing.
Bisra, K., Liu, Q., Nesbit, J. C., Salimi, F., & Winne, P. H. (2018). Inducing self-
explanation: A meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 30, 703–725. https://
doi .org /10 .1007 /s10648 -018 -9434 -x.
Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., et al. (2021). On the opportunities and risks of 
foundation models, https://doi .org /10 .48550 /ARXIV .2108 .07258.
Bredow, C. A., Roehling, P. V., Knorp, A. J., & Sweet, A. M. (2021). To ﬂip or not to 
ﬂip? A meta-analysis of the eﬃcacy of ﬂipped learning in higher education. Review of 
Educational Research, 91, 878–918. https://doi .org /10 .3102 /00346543211019122.
Bull, S. (2020). There are open learner models about! IEEE Transactions on Learning Tech-
nologies, 13, 425–448. https://doi .org /10 .1109 /TLT .2020 .2978473.
Cambre, J., Klemmer, S., & Kulkarni, C. (2018). Juxtapeer: Comparative peer review 
yields higher quality feedback and promotes deeper reﬂection. InProceedings of the 
2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems(pp.1–13).
Carless, D. (2009). Trust, distrust and their impact on assessment reform. As-
sessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 34, 79–89. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /
02602930801895786.
Carless, D. (2019). Feedback loops and the longer-term: Towards feedback spirals. As-
sessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 44, 705–714. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /
02602938 .2018 .1531108.
Carless, D., Chan, K. K. H., To, J., Lo, M., & Barrett, E. (2018). Developing students’ capac-
ities for evaluative judgement through analysing exemplars. InDeveloping evaluative 
judgement in higher education(pp.108–116). Routledge.
Chaiklin, S. (2003). The zone of proximal development in Vygotsky’s analysis of learning 
and instruction. InLearning in doing: Social, cognitive and computational perspectives
(pp.39–64). Cambridge University Press.
Chan, A. (2023). Gpt-3 and instructgpt: Technological dystopianism, utopianism, and 
“contextual” perspectives in ai ethics and industry. AI and Ethics, 3, 53–64. https://
doi .org /10 .1007 /s43681 -022 -00148 -6.
Chang, J. C., Amershi, S., & Kamar, E. (2017). Revolt: Collaborative crowdsourcing for la-
beling machine learning datasets.In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human 
factors in computing systems(pp.2334–2346). New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Chao, M. M., Visaria, S., Mukhopadhyay, A., & Dehejia, R. (2017). Do rewards reinforce 
the growth mindset?: Joint eﬀects of the growth mindset and incentive schemes in 
a ﬁeld intervention. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General, 146, 1402. https://
doi .org /10 .1037 /xge0000355.
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H. P. d. O., Kaplan, J., Edwards, H., Burda, 
Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., et al. (2021). Evaluating large language models trained 
on code. https://doi .org /10 .48550 /arXiv .2107 .03374.
Choi, K., Shin, H., Xia, M., & Kim, J. (2022). Algosolve: Supporting subgoal learning 
in algorithmic problem-solving with learnersourced microtasks.In Proceedings of the 
2022 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Collis, B., & Moonen, J. (2002). The contributing student: A pedagogy for ﬂexible learn-
ing. Computers in the Schools, 19, 207–220. https://doi .org /10 .1300 /J025v19v03 _16.
Crutcher, R. J., & Healy, A. F. (1989). Cognitive operations and the generation eﬀect. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 669. https://
doi .org /10 .1037 /0278 -7393 .15 .4 .669.
Darvishi, A., Khosravi, H., Abdi, S., Sadiq, S., & Gaševi´c, D. (2022). Incorporating training, 
self-monitoring and ai-assistance to improve peer feedback quality.In Proceedings of 
the ninth ACM conference on learning @ scale(pp.35–47).
Darvishi, A., Khosravi, H., Rahimi, A., Sadiq, S., & Gaševi´c, D. (2023). Assessing the 
quality of student-generated content at scale: A comparative analysis of peer-review 
models. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 16, 106–120. https://doi .org /10 .
1109 /TLT .2022 .3229022.
Darvishi, A., Khosravi, H., & Sadiq, S. (2021). Employing peer review to evaluate the qual-
ity of student generated content at scale: A trust propagation approach.In Proceedings 
of the eighth ACM conference on learning @ scale(pp.139–150).
Darvishi, A., Khosravi, H., Sadiq, S., & Gaševi´c, D. (2022). Incorporating AI and learning 
analytics to build trustworthy peer assessment systems. British Journal of Educational 
Technology. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /bjet .13233.
Denny, P. (2013). The eﬀect of virtual achievements on student engagement.In Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 763–772). 
New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Denny, P. (2015). Generating practice questions as a preparation strategy for introductory 
programming exams.In Proceedings of the 46th ACM technical symposium on computer 
science education(pp.278–283). New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Denny, P., Cukierman, D., Luxton-Reilly, A., & Tempero, E. (2012). A case study of 
multi-institutional contributing-student pedagogy. Computer Science Education, 22, 
389–411. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /08993408 .2012 .727712.
Denny, P., Luxton-Reilly, A., & Hamer, J. (2008). The peerwise system of student con-
tributed assessment questions. InProceedings of the tenth conference on Australasian 
computing education, vol.78 (pp.69–74). AUS: Australian Computer Society, Inc.
Denny, P., Luxton-Reilly, A., & Simon, B. (2009). Quality of student contributed questions 
using peerwise.In Proceedings of the eleventh Australasian conference on computing ed-
ucation, vol. 95(pp.55–63).
Denny, P., Luxton-Reilly, A., Tempero, E., & Hendrickx, J. (2011). Codewrite: Supporting 
student-driven practice of Java. InProceedings of the 42nd ACM technical symposium 
on computer science education(pp.471–476). New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Denny, P., McDonald, F., Empson, R., Kelly, P., & Petersen, A. (2018). Empirical support 
for a causal relationship between gamiﬁcation and learning outcomes.In Proceedings 
of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1–13). New 
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Denny, P., Sarsa, S., Hellas, A., & Leinonen, J. (2022). Robosourcing educational 
resources–leveraging large language models for learnersourcing.In Proceedings of the 
ﬁrst annual workshop on learnersourcing: Student-generated content @ scale.
Devine, D. J., & Kozlowski, S. W. (1995). Domain-speciﬁc knowledge and task character-
istics in decision making. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 64, 
294–306.
Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidi-
rectional transformers for language understanding. https://doi .org /10 .48550 /arXiv .
1810 .04805.
DeWinstanley, P. A., & Bjork, E. L. (2004). Processing strategies and the generation eﬀect: 
Implications for making a better reader. Memory & Cognition, 32, 945–955. https://
doi .org /10 .3758 /BF03196872.
Divate, M., & Salgaonkar, A. (2017). Automatic question generation approaches and eval-
uation techniques. Current Science, 1683–1691. https://doi .org /10 .18520 /cs /v113 /
i09 /1683 -1691.
Doroudi, S., Kamar, E., Brunskill, E., & Horvitz, E. (2016). Toward a learning science 
for complex crowdsourcing tasks.In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human 
factors in computing systems(pp.2623–2634).
--- Page 18 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
18
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Doroudi, S., Williams, J. J., Kim, J., Patikorn, T., Ostrow, K., Selent, D., Heﬀernan, N. T., 
Hills, T. T., & Rosé, C. P. (2018). Crowdsourcing and education: Towards a theory and 
praxis of learnersourcing. In M. Mavrikis, & K. Porayska-Pomsta (Eds.), Rethinking 
learning in the digital age: Making the learning sciences count - proceedings of the 13th 
international conference of the learning sciences, ICLS 2018. International Society of the 
Learning Sciences. https://repository .isls .org /handle /1 /603.
Doyle, E., Buckley, P., & Whelan, J. (2019). Assessment co-creation: An exploratory anal-
ysis of opportunities and challenges based on student and instructor perspectives. 
Teaching in Higher Education, 24, 739–754. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /13562517 .2018 .
1498077.
Drori, I., Zhang, S., Shuttleworth, R., Tang, L., Lu, A., Ke, E., Liu, et al. (2021). A neural 
network solves, explains, and generates university math problems by program syn-
thesis and few-shot learning at human level, https://doi .org /10 .48550 /ARXIV .2112 .
15594.
Dunning, D. (2011). The dunning–kruger eﬀect: On being ignorant of one’s own igno-
rance.In Advances in experimental social psychology, vol.44 (pp.247–296). Elsevier.
Galloway, K. W., & Burns, S. (2015). Doing it for themselves: Students creating a high 
quality peer-learning environment. Chemistry Education Research and Practice, 16, 
82–92. https://doi .org /10 .1039 /C4RP00209A.
Gao, X. A., Wright, J. R., & Leyton-Brown, K. (2019). Incentivizing evaluation with peer 
prediction and limited access to ground truth. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 275, 618–638. 
https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .artint .2019 .03 .004.
Gehringer, E. F., Ehresman, L. M., & Skrien, D. J. (2006). Expertiza: Students helping 
to write an OOD text. InCompanion to the 21st ACM SIGPLAN symposium on object-
oriented programming systems, languages, and applications (pp. 901–906). New York, 
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Geiger, D., Rosemann, M., & Fielt, E. (2011). Crowdsourcing information systems–a sys-
tems theory perspective.In 22nd Australasian conference on information systems.
Glassman, E. L., Lin, A., Cai, C. J., & Miller, R. C. (2016). Learnersourcing personalized 
hints.In Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on computer-supported cooperative work 
& social computing(pp.1626–1636).
Guo, P. J., Markel, J. M., & Zhang, X. (2020). Learnersourcing at scale to overcome expert 
blind spots for introductory programming: A three-year deployment study on the 
python tutor website.In Proceedings of the seventh ACM conference on learning @ scale
(pp.301–304).
Gyamﬁ, G., Hanna, B., & Khosravi, H. (2021a). Supporting peer evaluation of student-
generated content: A study of three approaches. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher 
Education, 1–19. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /02602938 .2021 .2006140.
Gyamﬁ, G., Hanna, B. E., & Khosravi, H. (2021b). The eﬀects of rubrics on evaluative 
judgement: A randomised controlled experiment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher 
Education, 47, 126–143. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /02602938 .2021 .1887081.
Hamer, J. (2006). Some experiences with the “contributing student approach”. InPro-
ceedings of the 11th annual SIGCSE conference on innovation and technology in computer 
science education(pp.68–72). New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Hamer, J., Cutts, Q., Jackova, J., Luxton-Reilly, A., McCartney, R., Purchase, H., Riedesel, 
C., Saeli, M., Sanders, K., & Sheard, J. (2008). Contributing student pedagogy. SIGCSE 
Bulletin, 40, 194–212. https://doi .org /10 .1145 /1473195 .1473242.
Hamer, J., Ma, K. T., & Kwong, H. H. (2005). A method of automatic grade calibration in 
peer assessment.In Proceedings of the 7th Australasian conference on computing educa-
tion, vol.42 (pp.67–72).
Hamer, J., Sheard, J., Purchase, H., & Luxton-Reilly, A. (2012). Contributing student 
pedagogy, https://doi .org /10 .1145 /1473195 .1473242.
Hardy, J., Bates, S. P., Casey, M. M., Galloway, K. W., Galloway, R. K., Kay, A. E., Kir-
sop, P., & McQueen, H. A. (2014). Student-generated content: Enhancing learning 
through sharing multiple-choice questions. International Journal of Science Education, 
36, 2180–2194. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /09500693 .2014 .916831.
Heﬀernan, N. T., & Heﬀernan, C. L. (2014). The assistments ecosystem: Building a plat-
form that brings scientists and teachers together for minimally invasive research on 
human learning and teaching. International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Educa-
tion, 24, 470–497. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s40593 -014 -0024 -x.
Hills, T. T. (2015). Crowdsourcing content creation in the classroom. Journal of Computing 
in Higher Education, 27, 47–67. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s12528 -015 -9089 -2.
Hilton, C. B., Goldwater, M. B., Hancock, D., Clemson, M., Huang, A., & Denyer, G. (2022). 
Scalable science education via online cooperative questioning. CBE—Life Sciences Ed-
ucation, 21, Articlear4.  https://doi .org /10 .1187 /cbe .19 -11 -0249.
Huang, A., Hancock, D., Clemson, M., Yeo, G., Harney, D., Denny, P., & Denyer, G. (2021). 
Selecting student-authored questions for summative assessments. Research in Learning 
Technology, 29, 1–25. https://doi .org /10 .25304 /rlt .v29 .2517.
Jeong, H., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Jo, K. (2019). Ten years of computer-supported col-
laborative learning: A meta-analysis of cscl in stem education during 2005–2014. 
Educational Research Review, 28, Article 100284. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .edurev .
2019 .100284.
Ji, T., Lyu, C., Jones, G., Zhou, L., & Graham, Y. (2022). Qascore—an  unsupervised un-
referenced metric for the question generation evaluation. Entropy, 24, 1514. https://
doi .org /10 .3390 /e24111514.
Jiang, Y., Schlagwein, D., & Benatallah, B. (2018). A review on crowdsourcing for educa-
tion: State of the art of literature and practice.In PACIS(p.180).
Jin, H., Chang, M., & Kim, J. (2019). Solvedeep: A system for supporting subgoal learning 
in online math problem solving. InExtended abstracts of the 2019 CHI conference on 
human factors in computing systems(pp.1–6).
Jin, H., & Kim, J. (2022). Learnersourcing subgoal hierarchies of code examples. InPro-
ceedings of the ﬁrst annual workshop on learnersourcing: Student-generated content @ 
scale.
Jørnø, R. L., & Gynther, K. (2018). What constitutes an ‘actionable insight’in learning 
analytics? Journal of Learning Analytics, 5, 198–221. https://doi .org /10 .18608 /jla .
2018 .53 .13.
Kaliisa, R., Rienties, B., Mørch, A. I., & Kluge, A. (2022). Social learning analytics in 
computer-supported collaborative learning environments: A systematic review of em-
pirical studies. Computers and Education Open, Article 100073. https://doi .org /10 .
1016 /j .caeo .2022 .100073.
Kao, G. Y. M. (2013). Enhancing the quality of peer review by reducing student “free 
riding”: Peer assessment with positive interdependence. British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 44, 112–124. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /j .1467 -8535 .2011 .01278 .x.
Kasneci, E., Sessler, K., Küchemann, S., Bannert, M., Dementieva, D., Fischer, F., Gasser, 
U., Groh, G., et al. (2023). Chatgpt for good? On opportunities and challenges of 
large language models for education. Learning and Individual Diﬀerences, 103, Arti-
cle102274.  https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .lindif .2023 .102274.
Kay, A. E., Hardy, J., & Galloway, R. K. (2020). Student use of peerwise: A multi-
institutional, multidisciplinary evaluation. British Journal of Educational Technology, 
51, 23–35. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /bjet .12754.
Kelley, M. R., Chapman-Orr, E. K., Calkins, S., & Lemke, R. J. (2019). Generation and 
retrieval practice eﬀects in the classroom using peerwise. Teaching of Psychology, 46, 
121–126. https://doi .org /10 .1177 /0098628319834174.
Khan, V. J., Papangelis, K., & Markopoulos, P. (2020). Completing a crowdsourcing task 
instead of an assignment; what do university students think? InExtended abstracts of 
the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems(pp.1–8).
Khosravi, H., Cooper, K., & Kitto, K. (2017). Riple: Recommendation in peer-learning 
environments based on knowledge gaps and interests. Journal of Educational Data 
Mining, 9, 42–67. https://doi .org /10 .5281 /zenodo .3554627.
Khosravi, H., Demartini, G., Sadiq, S., & Gasevic, D. (2021). Charting the design and 
analytics agenda of learnersourcing systems.In LAK21: 11th international learning an-
alytics and knowledge conference(pp.32–42).
Khosravi, H., Gyamﬁ, G., Hanna, B. E., Lodge, J., & Abdi, S. (2021). Bridging the gap 
between theory and empirical research in evaluative judgment. Journal of Learning 
Analytics, 8, 117–132. https://doi .org /10 .18608 /jla .2021 .7206.
Khosravi, H., Kitto, K., & Williams, J. J. (2019). Ripple: A crowdsourced adaptive platform 
for recommendation of learning activities. Journal of Learning Analytics, 6, 91–105. 
https://doi .org /10 .18608 /jla .2019 .63 .12.
Khosravi, H., Shum, S. B., Chen, G., Conati, C., Tsai, Y. S., Kay, J., Knight, S., Martinez-
Maldonado, R., Sadiq, S., & Gaševi´c, D. (2022). Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence in 
education. Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 3, Article 100074. https://
doi .org /10 .1016 /j .caeai .2022 .100074.
Kim, H., Song, I., & Kim, J. (2022). Learnersourcing modular and dynamic multiple choice 
questions.In Learnersourcing: Student-generated content @ scale. Springer.
Kim, J. (2015). Learnersourcing: Improving learning with collective learner activity. Ph.D. 
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Kim, J., Guo, P. J., Cai, C. J., Li, S. W., Gajos, K. Z., & Miller, R. C. (2014). Data-driven 
interaction techniques for improving navigation of educational videos. InProceed-
ings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on user interface software and technology
(pp.563–572).
Kim, J., Miller, R. C., & Gajos, K. Z. (2013). Learnersourcing subgoal labeling to support 
learning from how-to videos.In CHI 2013(pp.685–690). New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Kinjo, H., & Snodgrass, J. G. (2000). Does the generation eﬀect occur for pictures? The 
American Journal of Psychology, 113, 95. https://doi .org /10 .2307 /1423462.
Koedinger, K. R., Brunskill, E., Baker, R. S., McLaughlin, E. A., & Stamper, J. (2013). New 
potentials for data-driven intelligent tutoring system development and optimization. 
AI Magazine, 34, 27–41. https://doi .org /10 .1609 /aimag .v34i3 .2484.
Krathwohl, D. R. (2002). A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy: An overview. Theory Into Prac-
tice, 41, 212–218. https://doi .org /10 .1207 /s15430421tip4104 _2.
Kurdi, G., Leo, J., Parsia, B., Sattler, U., & Al-Emari, S. (2020). A systematic review of au-
tomatic question generation for educational purposes. International Journal of Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence in Education, 30, 121–204. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s40593 -019 -00186 -y.
Lahza, H., Khosravi, H., & Demartini, G. (2023). Analytics of learning tactics and strate-
gies in an online learnersourcing environment. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 
39, 94–112. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /jcal .12729.
Lahza, H., Khosravi, H., Demartini, G., & Gasevic, D. (2022). Eﬀects of technological 
interventions for self-regulation: A control experiment in learnersourcing.In LAK22: 
12th international learning analytics and knowledge conference(pp.542–548).
Lee, C., et al. (2020). Question generation workﬂow: Incorporating student-generated 
content and peer evaluation. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Lehtinen, E., Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., & Muukkonen, H. (1999). 
Computer supported collaborative learning: A review.In The JHGI Giesbers reports on 
education, vol.10.
Leinonen, J., Denny, P., MacNeil, S., Sarsa, S., Bernstein, S., Kim, J., Tran, A., & Hellas, 
A. (2023). Comparing code explanations created by students and large language modelsIn
Proceedings of the 28th ACM conference oninnovation  and technology in computer science 
education, vol.1. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Leinonen, J., Pirttinen, N., & Hellas, A. (2020). Crowdsourcing content creation for sql 
practice. InProceedings of the 2020 ACM conference on innovation and technology in 
computer science education(pp. 349–355). New York, NY, USA: Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
--- Page 19 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
19
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
Li, L., Liu, X., & Steckelberg, A. L. (2010). Assessor or assessee: How student learning 
improves by giving and receiving peer feedback. British Journal of Educational Tech-
nology, 41, 525–536. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /j .1467 -8535 .2009 .00968 .x.
Liu, Y., & Chen, Y. (2016). Learning to incentivize: Eliciting eﬀort via output agreement.
In Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁfth international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence
(pp.3782–3788).
Lundstrom, K., & Baker, W. (2009). To give is better than to receive: The beneﬁts of peer 
review to the reviewer’s own writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 18, 30–43. 
https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jslw .2008 .06 .002.
Malau-Aduli, B. S., Assenheimer, D., Choi-Lundberg, D., & Zimitat, C. (2014). Using 
computer-based technology to improve feedback to staﬀ and students on mcq as-
sessments. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 51, 510–522. https://
doi .org /10 .1080 /14703297 .2013 .796711.
Matcha, W., Gaševi´c, D., Jovanovi´c, J., Uzir, N. A., Oliver, C. W., Murray, A., & Gasevic, D. 
(2020). Analytics of learning strategies: The association with the personality traits.
In Proceedings of the tenth international conference on learning analytics & knowledge
(pp.151–160).
Matcha, W., Gaševi´c, D., Pardo, A., et al. (2019). A systematic review of empirical studies 
on learning analytics dashboards: A self-regulated learning perspective. IEEE Trans-
actions on Learning Technologies, 13, 226–245. https://doi .org /10 .1109 /TLT .2019 .
2916802.
McBroom, J., & Paassen, B. (2020). Assessing the quality of mathematics ques-
tions using student conﬁdence scores. In J. Wang, A. Lamb, E. Saveliev, P. 
Cameron, et al. (Eds.), Winning contributions for task 3 of the NeurIPS 2020 ed-
ucation challenge. https://dqanonymousdata .blob .core .windows .net /neurips -public /
papers /mcbroom -paassen /neurips _edu _2020 .pdf.
Mitros, P. (2015). Learnersourcing of complex assessments.In L@S 2015. New York, NY, 
USA: Association for Computing Machinery (pp.317–320).
Moore, S., Nguyen, H., Bier, N., Domadia, T., & Stamper, J. (2023). Who writes to-
morrow’s learning activities? Exploring community college student participation in 
learnersourcing. InProceedings of the 17th international conference of the learning sci-
ences. International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Moore, S., Nguyen, H., & Stamper, J. (2022a). Participation and success with optional 
self-explanation for students in online undergraduate chemistry courses. InProceed-
ings of the 16th international conference of the learning sciences. International Society 
of the Learning Sciences (pp. 1381–1384). https://dev .stamper .org /publications /
MooreShortICLS2022 .pdf.
Moore, S., Nguyen, H. A., Bier, N., Domadia, T., & Stamper, J. (2022). Assessing the 
quality of student-generated short answer questions using gpt-3.In Educating for a new 
future: Making sense of technology-enhanced learning adoption: 17th European conference 
on technology enhanced learning, EC-TEL(pp.243–257). Springer.
Moore, S., Nguyen, H. A., & Stamper, J. (2020). Evaluating crowdsourcing and topic mod-
eling in generating knowledge components from explanations.InI.  I. Bittencourt, M. 
Cukurova, K. Muldner, R. Luckin, & E. Millán (Eds.), Artiﬁcial intelligence in education
(pp.398–410). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Moore, S., Nguyen, H. A., & Stamper, J. (2021). Examining the eﬀects of student partici-
pation and performance on the quality of learnersourcing multiple-choice questions.
InProceedings of the eighth ACM conference on learning @ scale(pp.209–220).
Moore, S., Nguyen, H. A., & Stamper, J. (2022b). Leveraging students to generate skill 
tags that inform learning analytics. InProceedings of the 16th international conference 
of the learning sciences(pp.791–798).
Moore, S., Nguyen, H. A., & Stamper, J. (2023). Assessing the quality of multiple-choice 
questions using gpt-4 and rule-based approaches.In Educating for a new future: Making 
sense of technology-enhanced learning adoption: 18th European conference on technology 
enhanced learning, EC-TEL. Springer.
Moore, S., Stamper, J., Bier, N., & Blink, M. J. (2021). A human-centered approach to 
data driven iterative course improvement.In Cross reality and data science in engineer-
ing: Proceedings of the 17th international conference on remote engineering and virtual 
instrumentation, vol.17 (pp.742–761). Springer.
Moore, S., Stamper, J., Brooks, C., Denny, P., & Khosravi, H. (2022). Learnersourcing: 
Student-generated content at scale.In Proceedings of the ninth ACM conference on learn-
ing @ scale(pp.259–262).
Morales-Martinez, G., Latreille, P., & Denny, P. (2020). Nationality and gender biases in 
multicultural online learning environments: The eﬀects of anonymity. New York, NY, USA: 
Association for Computing Machinery (pp.1–14).
Nathan, M. J., Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., et al. (2001). Expert blind spot: When 
content knowledge eclipses pedagogical content knowledge.In Proceedings of the third 
international conference on cognitive science.
Negi, S., Asooja, K., Mehrotra, S., & Buitelaar, P. (2016). A study of suggestions in opin-
ionated texts and their automatic detection.In Proceedings of the ﬁfth joint conference 
on lexical and computational semantics(pp.170–178).
Ni, L., Bao, Q., Li, X., Qi, Q., Denny, P., Warren, J., Witbrock, M., & Liu, J. (2021). 
Deepqr: Neural-based quality ratings for learnersourced multiple-choice questions. 
https://doi .org /10 .48550 /arXiv .2111 .10058.
Nicol, D., Thomson, A., & Breslin, C. (2014). Rethinking feedback practices in higher 
education: A peer review perspective. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 39, 
102–122. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /02602938 .2013 .795518.
OpenAI (2023). Gpt-4 technical report, arXiv :2303 .08774.
Palisse, J., King, D. M., & MacLean, M. (2021). Comparative judgement and the hierarchy 
of students’ choice criteria. International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science 
and Technology, 1–21. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /0020739X .2021 .1962553.
Papanikolaou, K. A. (2014). Constructing interpretative views of learners’ interaction be-
havior in an open learner model. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 201–214. 
https://doi .org /10 .1109 /TLT .2014 .2363663.
Pirttinen, N., Kangas, V., Nikkarinen, I., Nygren, H., Leinonen, J., & Hellas, A. (2018). 
Crowdsourcing programming assignments with crowdsorcerer. InProceedings of the 
23rd annual ACM conference on innovation and technology in computer science education
(pp.326–331). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Pirttinen, N., & Leinonen, J. (2022). Can students review their peers? Comparison of peer 
and instructor reviews. InProceedings of the 27th ACM conference on innovation and 
technology in computer science education, vol.1.
Pitt, R. (2015). Mainstreaming open textbooks: Educator perspectives on the impact of 
openstax college open textbooks. InInternational review of research in open and dis-
tributed learning, vol.16.
Plak, S., van Klaveren, C., & Cornelisz, I. (2023). Raising student engagement using digital 
nudges tailored to students’ motivation and perceived ability levels. British Journal of 
Educational Technology, 54, 554–580. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /bjet .13261.
Polisda, Y. (2017). Peer review: A strategy to improve students’ academic essay writings. 
English Franca: Academic Journal of English Language and Education, 1, 45–60.
Quintana, R. M., Brooks, C., Smothers, C. V., Tan, Y., Yao, Z., & Kulkarni, C. (2018). 
Mentor academy: Engaging global learners in the creation of data science problems 
for MOOCs. Inernational Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc. [ISLS].
Ramesh, A., Dhariwal, P., Nichol, A., Chu, C., & Chen, M. (2022). Hierarchical text-
conditional image generation with clip latents. https://doi .org /10 .48550 /arXiv .
2204 .06125.
Rannikmäe, M., Holbrook, J., & Soobard, R. (2020). Social constructivism—Jerome Bruner. 
Cham: Springer International Publishing (pp.259–275).
Reily, K., Finnerty, P. L., & Terveen, L. (2009). Two peers are better than one: Aggregating 
peer reviews for computing assignments is surprisingly accurate.In Proceedings of the 
ACM 2009 international conference on supporting group work(pp.115–124).
Riggs, C. D., Kang, S., & Rennie, O. (2020). Positive impact of multiple-choice question 
authoring and regular quiz participation on student learning. CBE—Life Sciences Edu-
cation, 19, Articlear16.  https://doi .org /10 .1187 /cbe .19 -09 -0189.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Kmicikewycz, A. (2008). When generating answers beneﬁts arith-
metic skill: The importance of prior knowledge. Journal of Experimental Child Psychol-
ogy, 101, 75–81. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jecp .2008 .03 .001.
Roberts, T. S. (2005). Computer-supported collaborative learning in higher education.In
Computer-supported collaborative learning in higher education(pp.1–18). IGI global.
Roitero, K., Barbera, D. L., Soprano, M., Demartini, G., Mizzaro, S., & Sakai, T. (2023). 
How many crowd workers do I need? On statistical power when crowdsourcing rele-
vance judgments. ACM Transactions on Information Systems. https://doi .org /10 .1145 /
3597201.
Sarsa, S., Denny, P., Hellas, A., & Leinonen, J. (2022). Automatic generation of program-
ming exercises and code explanations using large language models. InProceedings 
of the 2022 ACM conference on international computing education research V.1 (ICER 
2022). ACM.
Scapin, D. L. (1982). Generation eﬀect, structuring and computer commands. Behaviour & 
Information Technology, 1, 401–410. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /01449298208914461.
Schmidt, F. A. (2013). The good, the bad and the ugly: Why crowdsourcing needs ethics.
In2013 international conference on cloud and green computing(pp.531–535). IEEE.
Singh, A., Brooks, C., & Doroudi, S. (2022). Learnersourcing in theory and practice: 
Synthesizing the literature and charting the future. InProceedings of the ninth ACM 
conference on learning @ scale(pp.234–245).
Singh, A., Brooks, C., Lin, Y., & Li, W. (2021). What’s in it for the learners? Evidence 
from a randomized ﬁeld experiment on learnersourcing questions in a MOOC. In
Proceedings of the eighth ACM conference on learning @ scale(pp.221–233). New York, 
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Slamecka, N. J., & Graf, P. (1978). The generation eﬀect: Delineation of a phenomenon. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Learning and Memory, 4, 592–604. https://
doi .org /10 .1037 /0278 -7393 .4 .6 .592.
Snow, S., Wilde, A., Denny, P., & Schraefel, m. c. (2019). A discursive question: Sup-
porting student-authored multiple choice questions through peer-learning software 
in non-stemm disciplines. British Journal of Educational Technology, 50, 1815–1830. 
https://doi .org /10 .1111 /bjet .12686.
Snowball, J. D., & McKenna, S. (2017). Student-generated content: An approach to har-
nessing the power of diversity in higher education. Teaching in Higher Education, 22, 
604–618. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /13562517 .2016 .1273205.
Sommers, N. (1982). Responding to student writing. College Composition and Communica-
tion, 33, 148–156.
Tackett, S., Raymond, M., Desai, R., Haist, S. A., Morales, A., Gaglani, S., & Clyman, S. 
G. (2018). Crowdsourcing for assessment items to support adaptive learning. Medical 
Teacher, 40, 838–841. https://doi .org /10 .1080 /0142159X .2018 .1490704.
Tai, J., Ajjawi, R., Boud, D., Dawson, P., & Panadero, E. (2018). Developing evaluative 
judgement: Enabling students to make decisions about the quality of work. Higher 
Education, 76, 467–481. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s10734 -017 -0220 -3.
Tennant, J. P. (2018). The state of the art in peer review. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 365, 
Articlefny204.
VanLehn, K., Jones, R. M., & Chi, M. T. (1992). A model of the self-explanation eﬀect. The 
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 1–59.
Walsh, J. L., Harris, B. H., Denny, P., & Smith, P. (2018). Formative student-authored 
question bank: Perceptions, question quality and association with summative 
--- Page 20 ---
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100151
20
H.Khosravi,P.Denny,S.Mooreetal.
performance. Postgraduate Medical Journal, 94, 97–103. https://doi .org /10 .1136 /
postgradmedj -2017 -135018.
Wang, W., An, B., & Jiang, Y. (2020). Optimal spot-checking for improving the evaluation 
quality of crowdsourcing: Application to peer grading systems. IEEE Transactions on 
Computational Social Systems, 7, 940–955.
Wang, X., Talluri, S. T., Rose, C., & Koedinger, K. (2019). Upgrade: Sourcing student 
open-ended solutions to create scalable learning opportunities. InL@S 2019. New 
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Wang, Z., Lamb, A., Saveliev, E., Cameron, P., Zaykov, J., Hernandez-Lobato, J. M., 
Turner, R. E., Baraniuk, R. G., Barton, C., Jones, S. P., et al. (2021). Results and 
insights from diagnostic questions: The neurips 2020 education challenge.In NeurIPS 
2020 competition and demonstration track, PMLR(pp.191–205).
Wang, Z., Manning, K., Mallick, D. B., & Baraniuk, R. G. (2021). Towards blooms taxon-
omy classiﬁcation without labels.In International conference on artiﬁcial intelligence in 
education(pp.433–445). Springer.
Wang, Z., Valdez, J., Basu Mallick, D., & Baraniuk, R. G. (2022). Towards human-like 
educational question generation with large language models. InArtiﬁcial intelligence 
in education: 23rd international conference, proceedings, part I (pp.153–166). Springer.
Weir, S., Kim, J., Gajos, K. Z., & Miller, R. C. (2015). Learnersourcing subgoal labels 
for how-to videos. InProceedings of the 18th ACM conference on computer supported 
cooperative work & social computing(pp.405–416).
Wheeler, S., Yeomans, P., & Wheeler, D. (2008). The good, the bad and the wiki: Evaluat-
ing student-generated content for collaborative learning. British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 39, 987–995. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /j .1467 -8535 .2007 .00799 .x.
Wiley, D., Bliss, T., & McEwen, M. (2014). Open educational resources: A review of 
the literature. InHandbook of research on educational communications and technology
(pp.781–789).
Williams, J. J., Kim, J., Raﬀerty, A., Maldonado, S., Gajos, K. Z., Lasecki, W. S., & Hef-
fernan, N. (2016). Axis: Generating explanations at scale with learnersourcing and 
machine learning. InProceedings of the third (2016) ACM conference on learning @ 
scale(pp.379–388).
Woolf, B. (2022). Introduction to IJAIED special issue, FATE in AIED, https://doi .org /10 .
1007 /s40593 -022 -00299 -x.
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., et al. (2014). Breaking the cycle of mistrust: 
Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology. General, 143, 804. https://doi .org /10 .1037 /a0033906.
Yeckehzaare, I., Barghi, T., & Resnick, P. (2020). Qmaps: Engaging students in voluntary 
question generation and linking. InProceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human 
factors in computing systems(pp.1–14).
Zdravkova, K. (2020). Ethical issues of crowdsourcing in education. Journal of Responsible 
Technology, 2, Article100004.  https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jrt .2020 .100004.
Zheng, Y., Li, G., Li, Y., Shan, C., & Cheng, R. (2017). Truth inference in crowdsourcing: 
Is the problem solved? Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 10, 541–552. https://
doi .org /10 .14778 /3055540 .3055547.