=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Review
Phases of inquiry-based learning: Deﬁnitions and the
inquiry cycle
Margus Pedastea,*,Mario Mäeotsa,Leo A. Siimana,Ton de Jongb,
Siswa A.N. van Riesenb,Ellen T. Kampb,Constantinos C. Manolic,
Zacharias C. Zachariac,Eleftheria Tsourlidakid
a University of Tartu, Salme 1a, 50103 Tartu, Estonia
b University of Twente, GW/IST Postbus 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
c University of Cyprus, P. O. Box 20537, 1678 Nicosia, Cyprus
d Ellinogermaniki Agogi Scholi Panagea Savva, Dimitriou Panagea St., 15351 Pallini, Greece
ARTICLE INFO
Article history:
Received 18 March 2014
Received in revised form 19 February 2015
Accepted 20 February 2015
Available online 25 February 2015
Keywords:
Inquiry-based learning
Inquiry cycle
Inquiry phases
Inquiry-based learning framework
ABSTRACT
Inquiry-based learning is gaining popularity in science curricula, international research and
development projects as well as teaching. One of the underlying reasons is that its success
canbesigniﬁcantlyimprovedduetotherecenttechnicaldevelopmentsthatallowtheinquiry
processtobesupportedbyelectroniclearningenvironments.Inquiry-basedlearningisoften
organized into inquiry phases that together form an inquiry cycle. However, different varia-
tions on what is called the inquiry cycle can be found throughout the literature. The current
article focuses on identifying and summarizing the core features of inquiry-based learn-
ing by means of a systematic literature review and develops a synthesized inquiry cycle
that combines the strengths of existing inquiry-based learning frameworks. The review was
conducted using the EBSCO host Library; a total of 32 articles describing inquiry phases
or whole inquiry cycles were selected based on speciﬁc search criteria. An analysis of the
articles resulted in the identiﬁcation of ﬁve distinct general inquiry phases: Orientation,
Conceptualization,Investigation,Conclusion,andDiscussion.Someof thesephasesaredivided
into sub-phases. In particular, the Conceptualization phase is divided into two (alterna-
tive)sub-phases,QuestioningandHypothesisGeneration;theInvestigationphaseisdivided
into three sub-phases, Exploration or Experimentation leading to Data Interpretation; and
the Discussion phase is divided into two sub-phases, Reﬂection and Communication. No
framework bringing together all of these phases and sub-phases was found in the litera-
ture. Thus, a synthesized framework was developed to describe an inquiry cycle in which
allof thesephasesandsub-phaseswouldbepresent.Inthisframework,inquiry-basedlearn-
ing begins with Orientation and ﬂows through Conceptualization to Investigation, where
several cycles are possible. Inquiry-based learning usually ends with the Conclusion phase.
TheDiscussionphase(whichincludesCommunicationandReﬂection)ispotentiallypresent
at every point during inquiry-based learning and connects to all the other phases, because
it can occur at any time during (discussion in-action) or after inquiry-based learning when
looking back (discussion on-action).
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
* Corresponding author. Tel.:+372 7376021; fax:+372 5156095.
E-mail address: margus.pedaste@ut.ee(M. Pedaste).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2015.02.003
1747-938X/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Educational Research Review
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/edurev


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Contents
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................. .......................................................................................................... 48
2. Method ....................................................................................................................... .............................................................................................................. 49
2.1. Search procedure ............................................................................................................ ........................................................................................ 50
2.2. Data analysis ............................................................................................................... ............................................................................................. 50
3. Findings and discussion ........................................................................................................ ............................................................................................. 51
3.1. Variety of inquiry phases ..................................................................................................... ................................................................................ 51
3.2. Descriptions of general inquiry phases ........................................................................................................................................................... 54
3.3. Inquiry-based learning framework ............................................................................................. ...................................................................... 55
4. Conclusions .................................................................................................................. ........................................................................................................... 57
Acknowledgements .............................................................................................................................................................................................................. 58
References ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 60
1. Introduction
Inquiry-based learning is an educational strategy in which students follow methods and practices similar to those of pro-
fessional scientists in order to construct knowledge (Keselman, 2003). It can be deﬁned as a process of discovering new
causal relations, with the learner formulating hypotheses and testing them by conducting experiments and/or making ob-
servations (
Pedaste, Mäeots, Leijen, & Sarapuu, 2012). Often it is viewed as an approach to solving problems and involves
the application of several problem solving skills (Pedaste & Sarapuu, 2006). Inquiry-based learning emphasizes active par-
ticipation and learner’s responsibility for discovering knowledge that is new to the learner (de Jong & van Joolingen, 1998).
In this process, students often carry out a self-directed, partly inductive and partly deductive learning process by doing ex-
periments to investigate the relations for at least one set of dependent and independent variables (
Wilhelm & Beishuizen,
2003). It should be added that in the context of this study we are focusing on learners: what is new knowledge to them is
not, in most cases, new knowledge to the world, even if the approach can be ﬂexibly used by scientists in making their dis-
coveries of new knowledge. In addition, it should be noted that an investigation does not always involve empirical
testing.
Severalquantitativestudiessupporttheeffectivenessof inquiry-basedlearningasaninstructionalapproach.
Alﬁeri,Brooks,
Aldrich, and Tenenbaum (2011), for example, performed a meta-analysis comparing inquiry to other forms of instruction,
such as direct instruction or unassisted discovery, and found that inquiry teaching resulted in better learning (mean effect
size of d =0.30). A meta-analysis by
Furtak, Seidel, Iverson, and Briggs (2012)incorporated studies using a broad range of
terms to describe inquiry-based learning (e.g., mastery learning, constructivist teaching); they reported an overall mean effect
size of 0.50 in favor of the inquiry approach over traditional instruction. A positive trend supporting inquiry-based science
instruction over traditional teaching methods was found in a research synthesis by
Minner, Levy, and Century (2010).I n
addition, it has been demonstrated that web-based guided inquiry-based learning can improve different inquiry skills, such
as identifying problems, formulating questions and hypotheses, planning and carrying out experiments, collecting and ana-
lyzing data, presenting the results, and drawing conclusions (
Mäeots, Pedaste, & Sarapuu, 2008). Recent technological
advancements increase the success of applying inquiry-based learning even more (de Jong, Sotiriou, & Gillet, 2014). Edu-
cational policy bodies worldwide regard inquiry-based learning as a vital component in building a scientiﬁcally literate
community (
European Commission, 2007; National Research Council, 2000). Therefore, it is valuable to examine inquiry-
basedlearningfurtherinmoredetailandidentifyitscoreelements.Inthisarticlewepresentsuchasearchforthekeyelements
of inquiry-based learning. In doing so, we have taken an approach where we have focused only on inquiry-based learning
describedunderthisterm.Severalrelatedareashavebeenexcluded,suchasdiscoverylearning,project-basedlearning,game-
based learning, and problem-based learning, as including these concepts would make our study too broad and the outcomes
might not be easily applicable in the practical context in developing inquiry activities by teachers or educational
designers.
Inquiry-based learning aspires to engage students in an authentic scientiﬁc discovery process. From a pedagogical per-
spective,thecomplexscientiﬁcprocessisdividedintosmaller,logicallyconnectedunitsthatguidestudentsanddrawattention
to important features of scientiﬁc thinking. These individual units are called inquiry phases, and their set of connections
forms an inquiry cycle. The educational literature describes a variety of inquiry phases and cycles. For example, the 5E learn-
ingcyclemodel(
Bybeeetal.,2006 )listsﬁveinquiryphases:Engagement,Exploration,Explanation,Elaboration,andEvaluation.
An inquiry cycle proposed byWhite and Frederiksen (1998)also identiﬁes ﬁve inquiry phases, but labels them as Ques-
tion, Predict, Experiment, Model, and Apply. An apparent distinction between these examples is that the initial phases of
the 5E cycle (Engagement and Exploration) suggest starting with an inductive (empirical/data-driven) approach, whereas
theﬁrsttwophasesof theWhiteandFrederikseninquirycycle(QuestionandPredict)suggestadeductive(theory/hypothesis-
driven) approach. However, both induction and deduction can coexist in an inquiry cycle. In fact,
Klahr and Dunbar (1988)
characterized the scientiﬁc reasoning process as a dual search in two spaces, which they call experiment space and hy-
pothesis space. How researchers choose to balance inductive and deductive approaches in an inquiry cycle can inﬂuence
the selection and/or arrangement of inquiry phases.
48 M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Inquiry cycles follow from a historical progression of instructional models and therefore represent a contemporary view
that is built upon a solid historical foundation.Bybee et al. (2006)discussed the origins of the 5E instructional model and
show that early frameworks began with deﬁning a list of fundamental conceptual phases. For example,Dewey (1933)out-
linedseveralimportantaspectsof inquiry-basedlearning,suchasdeﬁningaproblem,formulatingahypothesis,andconducting
tests. Later frameworks elaborated on the interaction between phases, the sequencing of phases, modiﬁcations in termi-
nology, and the necessity of particular phases. Bybee et al. emphasized that prior instructional models served as a foundation
to build newer models. Therefore, many contemporary inquiry cycles implicitly reﬂect aspects of earlier frameworks such
as the empirical cycle by
de Groot (1969).
The way an inquiry cycle is presented usually suggests an ordered sequence of phases. However, researchers are also
usuallycarefultoaddadisclaimerthatinquiry-basedlearningisnotaprescribed,uniformlinearprocess.Connectionsbetween
the phases may vary depending on the context. In an inquiry cycle proposed by
Justice et al. (2002), a single inquiry phase
(Self-reﬂection/Self-evaluation) directly connects to all other phases. The authors argued that this particular inquiry phase,
which encourages learner self-awareness, is needed at all inquiry phases. How inquiry phases are arranged in an inquiry
cycle can depend on the nature of the phase.
de Jong and Njoo (1992), for example, made a distinction between inquiry
processes that directly generate or transform information (transformative processes) and processes that manage the learn-
ing process (regulative processes). As seen with the various terms applied for different inquiry phases, certain diversity also
appears in understanding the relations and sequencing of the inquiry phases within inquiry cycles, for example, whether
regulative processes are related to the whole, overarching inquiry-based learning or to each speciﬁc phase. Clariﬁcation would
help avoid confusion among teachers and instructional designers who work with inquiry-based learning approaches.
Based on our initial analysis of several articles (
Bybee et al., 2006; Justice et al., 2002; White & Frederiksen, 1998)w e
found that different descriptions of inquiry cycles in the research literature originating from different researchers use various
terminologies to label phases that are essentially the same. A preference for one term over another is not consequential as
long as the terminology has been clearly deﬁned and understood. But what is important is to ﬁnd out how many inquiry
phases are actually unique and conceptually independent. Another assumption we make is that the diversity of inquiry cycles
can be simpliﬁed according to the framework by
Klahr and Dunbar (1988)in which inquiry reasoning processes are divided
into two parts. The two parts relate to the inductive/deductive dichotomy in scientiﬁc reasoning, and in the case of diverse
inquiry cycles it may be that different researchers have constructed different cycles based on placing more emphasis on one
approach over the other. It is important to examine how inquiry phases relate to the path along which an inquiry reason-
ing process proceeds.
Therefore, we feel there is a need for an analysis of the terms used for describing inquiry phases in order to provide a
comprehensive inquiry cycle that is aligned with the most common understandings about inquiry-based learning. A rigor-
ous and systematic review that identiﬁes and extracts the core components of inquiry-based learning is then able to provide
abroadframeworktoorganizethemanyspeciﬁcimplementationsof inquirycyclesdescribedbyvariousresearchers.Itshould
offer a contemporary and concise summary of how inquiry-based learning is structured. It is also worth mentioning that
most previous instructional models only focused on transformative learning processes and did not include regulative pro-
cesses as independent inquiry phases. The interaction between transformative and regulative processes is now viewed as a
key element in inquiry-based learning (
de Jong & van Joolingen, 1998).
Although the literature on inquiry cycles and phases presents a variety of terms for phases and connections between
phases, the successful application of inquiry cycles in situations ranging from in-classroom activities (Meyerson & Secules,
2001) to computer-based environments (de Jong et al., 2010; Mäeots, Pedaste, & Sarapuu, 2011) suggests an underlying com-
monality that is at the core of inquiry-based learning.
The goal of this article is to identify and summarize the core features of inquiry cycles from the viewpoint of the learn-
ingprocessbysystematicallyreviewingtheliteratureoninquiryphasesandcycles.Theoutcomeof thisreviewisasynthesized
inquiry cycle that combines the strengths of existing inquiry-based learning frameworks.
In the current article the following research questions were addressed:
(1) Which inquiry phases are necessary for complete inquiry-based learning?
(2) How should the inquiry phases be arranged to inquiry cycles and an inquiry-based learning framework?
2. Method
A systematic literature review was conducted in order to identify the core phases of inquiry-based learning and how
the different phases are involved in the learning process. The EBSCO host Library (
www.ebscohost.com) database was used
to search for articles using the search terms:inquiry phases, inquiry stages, inquiry cycle, inquiry models, inquiry learning pro-
cesses, inquiry-based learning. The search was limited to the term ‘inquiry’ in different contexts since it was important to
focus on how this particular and widely used term had been used in several policy documents (European Commission, 2007,
2011; National Research Council, 2000, 2006; Rocard et al., 2007) or in national curricula. The EBSCO host Library was se-
lectedbecausethisdatabasehasmeta-dataof morethan64,000journals,6millionbooks,and400,000conferenceproceedings.
This exceeds the numbers in Scopus or ISI Web of Knowledge. In the following sections, an overview of the search and data-
analysis processes is presented.
49M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
2.1. Search procedure
The ﬁrst step in the search procedure (Fig.1) was the selection of the educational databases referenced in EBSCO host
Library.Thefollowingdatabaseswereincluded: Academic Search Complete, Central & Eastern European Academic Source, E-Journals,
ERIC, PsycARTICLES, PsycINFO, andTeacher Reference Centre. To specify the search to retrieve a high number of academically
relevant research articles, the following search criteria were set in EBSCO: (1) related words applied; (2) search within the
full text of the articles; (3) full text available; (4) published since 1972 (the earliest year available); and (5) academic jour-
nals as a source type. The search was carried out on 1 December 2012 and resulted in 535 matches for the term “inquiry
phases”; 920 matches for the term “inquiry stages”; 294 matches for the term “inquiry cycle”; 528 matches for the term
“inquiry models”; 51 matches for the term “inquiry learning processes”; and 2000 matches for the term “inquiry-based learn-
ing”. Most of the articles retrieved in this initial step did not focus on educational issues (e.g., ‘inquiry cycle’ is a software
engineering term used for improving a set of requirements, ‘inquiry models’ can refer to professional ethics in the medical
ﬁeld, ‘inquiry phase’ is sometimes a synonym for discovery phase in legal terminology). Eliminating these non-relevant search
matches therefore narrowed down the results to 60 articles that addressed inquiry in an educational context as an ap-
proach for learning.
2.2. Data analysis
The systematic review process for the 60 selected articles consisted of three steps. First, each article was categorized
into one of two groups depending on the information it contained: (1) descriptions of general inquiry phases only;
(2) descriptions of inquiry phases along with possible inquiry cycles (see
Appendix A). All articles that did not
include at least one of these types of information were excluded from the following analysis, which reduced the
number of selected articles to 32. Second, the terms describing inquiry phases were extracted from each article.
Third, available descriptions of the reported inquiry phases were collected from the articles selected for the
analysis and sources outside the articles, if necessary, in order to clarify their content and relations with other
phases.
Comparative analysis of the data extracted from the 32 articles involved compiling deﬁnitions of the inquiry phases, de-
termining their position in the inquiry cycle, and eliminating redundancy between phases. If a speciﬁc term was not deﬁned
by the authors, then the meaning of the term in the context of the article was analyzed in order to classify the term within
the framework of the authors’ other terms. Next, the terms of the inquiry activities were sequenced, and the inquiry phases
described by different authors with different terms were compared. This helped to build a system of terms that served the
study as a database for ﬁnding the most common inquiry phases and for merging multiple sub-processes to form bigger
modules.
“inquiry phases” N = 535
“inquiry stages” N = 920
“inquiry cycle” N = 294
“inquiry models” N = 528
“inquiry learning processes”
N = 51
“inquiry-based learning“
N = 2000 
Academic Search Complete, 
Central & Eastern European 
Academic Source, E-
Journals, ERIC, 
PsycARTICLES, PsycINFO, 
and Teacher Reference 
Centre
Included
AHFS Consumer Medication Information, ATLA Religion Database with 
ATLASerials, Business Source Complete, Communication & Mass Media Complete, 
Dentistry & Oral Sciences Source, European Views of the Americas: 1493 to 1750, 
GeoRef, GeoRef In Process, GreenFILE, Health Source - Consumer Edition, Health 
Source: Nursing/Academic Edition, Library, Information Science & Technology 
Abstracts, MasterFILE Premier, MEDLINE, MLA Directory of Periodicals, MLA 
International Bibliography, Newswires, Philosopher's Index, Regional Business News, 
SPORTDiscus
Excluded
Addressing inquiry in an 
educational context as an 
approach of learning
N = 60
Selection of EBSCO host 
Library databases
Process
Search for specific terms in 
selected databases
Limitations in Thesaurus 
terms
rorschach test, philosophy, psychotherapy, personality tests, culture, personality
assessment, counseling, career development, medical care, patients, mental health, 
pathological psychology, philosophers, projective techniques, therapeutics, ethics, 
medical personnel, mental health services, parent & child, associations, institutions, 
etc., child welfare, history, realism, judgments (law), abduction (logic), nursing, courts, 
criminal law, equality, government policy, metaphysics, pluralism, human rights, 
public health, religion, anthropology, saving& investment, business cycles, leadership, 
dietetics, dietitians, narcissism, interpersonal relations, personality, emotions
(psychology), self-esteem, ability, adventure education, architecture – study & 
teaching, audiovisual materials, authority, bio-bibliography, candy, community
organization, communities, computer engineering, computer users, undergraduates
Fig. 1. Flowchart of the literature search procedure.
50 M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
3. Findings and discussion
The review of the 32 articles allowed us to generate an initial overview of the common phases across the articles and
was the basis for proposing a comprehensive inquiry-based learning framework. It was decided that this synthesis would
be limited to the articles found by the systematic search in order to avoid unsystematic collection of articles that would
decrease the reliability of the study. First, we describe how we merged the variety of terms that were used to describe inquiry
phases in the articles analyzed in this study. Next, the common inquiry phases are introduced, and ﬁnally, these are syn-
thesized in a new framework that captures the core of the inquiry cycles presented in the 32 articles selected in this literature
search.
3.1. Variety of inquiry phases
The review process resulted in a list of 109 different terms for inquiry phases (see
Appendix A). These terms showed
considerable overlap, which became evident when comparing the descriptions of the phases. Therefore, in the ﬁrst round
of analysis, the meaning of the terms used by different authors was analyzed, and the terms were grouped according to
similar criteria, creating a list of 34 slightly different inquiry activities. The reduction from 109 to 34 terms occurred through
a process of comparing deﬁnitions of different terms and eliminating redundancies. Next, in the second round these 34 pro-
cesses were sequenced and re-organized into 11 prospective phases; in the third round of analysis these 11 were ﬁnally
merged into ﬁve general inquiry phases along with a few sub-phases (see
Fig.2). We took into account that a cycle that
would present too many phases could adversely affect student learning in an environment for inquiry-based learning, and,
therefore, discussions also focused on merging terms to reach an optimal number of phases. The details of this process as
well as the reasons for merging the processes into phases will follow.
Six out of the 32 articles initiated the inquiry cycle with ‘orientation’, ‘introducing a topic’ or ‘theory’ (group 1 in
Fig.2),
followed up by ‘learning challenge’, ‘anchor’, ‘ﬁnd my topic’, ‘engage’, ‘learner investigates scientiﬁcally oriented questions’
Fig. 2. Visualization of the process by which the initial 34 groups of inquiry activities were merged into bigger groups and ﬁnally into ﬁve general inquiry
phases.
51M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
(group 3). Some articles also described an intermediate process, simple ‘observation’ or ‘exploration’ of the behavior (group
2). Overall, all of these activities fall under the term ‘orientation’, since their aim is to get the learner started with a new
topic for investigation. One has to explore or observe a phenomenon in order to get interested in it, to read some theory in
order to know the scientiﬁcally oriented questions related to this particular phenomenon, and to engage him or herself with
the issue through a challenging anchor point. In addition, it was found that ‘orientation’ was the most frequently used term
in talking about these three initial processes: the term ‘orientation’ was used in four of the articles, whereas all other terms
were used only once or twice. Thus, it was decided that the ﬁrst inquiry phase in the compiled inquiry cycle should be
Orientation.
The inquiry cycle continued (or in some articles began) with asking more speciﬁc scientiﬁc questions that might be spe-
ciﬁcresearchquestionsormoreopenquestionsaboutaparticulardomain.Thisprocesswasaverycommononeintheliterature
review; 14 out of the 32 articles described it using the following terms: ‘ask’, ‘question’, ‘ask questions’, ‘developing a ques-
tion’, ‘initial inquiry question’, ‘generating a scientiﬁc question’, ‘set up of inquiry question’, ‘raising and revising questions’,
‘decide my inquiry question or hypothesis’, ‘intent’ (group 4). This set of terms suggested that the second inquiry phase in
our provisional inquiry cycle should be Questioning, because it covers the meaning behind all of the terms used in the 14
articles.
Hypothesis Generation was introduced in the provisional inquiry cycle as the third stage, because it was very common
in the reviewed research articles. Eleven out of the 32 articles introduced it through the following terms: ‘predict’, ‘making
predictions’, ‘hypothesize’, ‘hypothesis generation’, ‘setting hypotheses’, ‘hypothesize ideas’, ‘brainstorming solutions’, ‘gen-
erate testable hypotheses’ (group 8). Despite the differences in terms used by the authors, these all indicated a need to have
a hypothesis or prediction before the learner can start with planning an exploration or investigation. Three slightly differ-
ent intermediate processes that help move from questioning toward hypothesis generation were also identiﬁed. The ﬁrst
of these (group 5) was described through phrases such as ‘determining what needs to be known’, ‘deﬁne problem’, ‘iden-
tifying the problem’, ‘identiﬁcation of a question or questions’. These processes can be related to the previous phase of
Questioning. Similarly, the other two processes (groups 6 and 7) can be related to the process of Hypothesis Generation,
since these describe processes that are needed to collect information for formulating hypotheses. These processes were de-
scribed by different authors through the following phrases: ‘searching for information on the web’, ‘analysing’, or ‘needs
assessment’. These processes guide learners toward hypothesis generation. Overall, however, it was clear that there was an
overlap between the processes for generating hypotheses and questioning. Therefore, it was decided for the ﬁnal inquiry
cycle to position Questioning and Hypothesis Generation as sub-phases that together form a more general inquiry phase
termed Conceptualization.
The Hypothesis Generation sub-phase or general Conceptualization phase was followed by a distinct planning process
that was characterized in 10 articles as ‘plan my methods’, ‘carrying out a plan’, ‘experiment design’, ‘develop action plan’,
‘design studies’, ‘planning’, ‘plan question’, ‘designing experiments’, or ‘design of an investigation to address them [ques-
tions]’ (group 9). A slightly different process was introduced by two other authors: ‘equipment and actions [planning what
is needed according to methods]’ and ‘identifying resources’ (group 10). In our initial analysis, all of these activities were
combined in an inquiry activity called Planning. In the subsequent analysis, Planning is considered as a sub-process within
the Investigation phase, which is the third general inquiry phase after Orientation and Conceptualization in the compiled
inquiry cycle.
The Investigation phase was characterized in 11 articles through the following terms: ‘investigate’, ‘observe’, ‘observa-
tion’, ‘collect my evidence’, ‘conduct observation’, ‘explore’, ‘exploration’, ‘initial observation’ (group 11). ‘Investigate’ was a
term used by three authors, ‘observation’ by ﬁve authors and ‘exploration’ by three authors. It was understood that inves-
tigation is somewhat more systematic and based on a plan, while observation and exploration may have more ﬂexibility.
Two types of investigation processes were distinguished: Exploration and Experimentation. Exploration is seen as a sub-
phase of Investigation and more related to a simple observation process. In this process, students make discoveries related
to their questions without clear hypotheses in mind. Experimentation is a sub-phase where students collect evidence con-
cerning a hypothesis; it is derived from the ideas introduced in the articles that differentiated an investigation process. Both
Exploration and Experimentation involve Planning.
Processes in groups 12–15 were uncommon and were left out of the general inquiry-based learning framework but can
still be considered as activities within the Investigation phase: ‘wonder’, ‘resources’, ‘accessing data of their choice to address
the question’, ‘sign system exploration’, ‘create’, ‘generate’.
Another process involved in the planning processes in both the Exploration and Experimentation sub-phase is data col-
lection (group 16). The data collection process was indicated by the following terms: ‘research’, ‘recording and organizing
data’, ‘gathering data’, ‘investigate’, ‘investigation’, ‘experiment’, ‘experimentation’, ‘implement plan’, ‘collect and analyse
data’, ‘collecting data’.
Next (groups 18–21), processes conducted after the simple data analysis were described through several terms that in-
dicate follow-up activities to help in drawing conclusions: ‘organizing data’, ‘synthesizing’, ‘generating a synthesis’, ‘data
interpretation, ‘integrating different pieces of information to answer the driving question’, ‘model’, ‘learner formulates ex-
planations from evidence’, ‘transmediation’. No speciﬁc phase was created for these activities in the current synthesis. These
activities concerning more advanced data analysis are part of the sub-phase Data Interpretation, which thus consists of both
simple and advanced data analysis. In the ﬁnal version of the inquiry cycle, Data Interpretation is seen as one sub-phase of
the Investigation phase, together with the Exploration and Experimentation sub-phases. These processes form a coherent
52 M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
set where a learner could move backwards and forwards several times if Data Interpretation leads to revising an Experi-
mentation plan or stimulates additional Exploration.
The next process could be characterized as (Data) Analysis. The process of data analysis was the one most frequent one
in the articles analyzed in the review (explicitly present in this narrow meaning in 16 articles). The terms used included
‘analyse and represent my evidence’, ‘assessing data’, ‘analysis’, ‘explain’, ‘analyse’, ‘ﬁnd patterns’, ‘evaluating and making
senseof onlineinformation’,‘collectandinterpretdata’,‘learnergivesprioritytoevidenceinrespondingtoquestions’,‘analyse
evidence’, ‘analysing data’, ‘examination and analysis of empirical data’, ‘analysing these data to identify patterns and make
inferences’.
Finally, 14 articles included a conclusion process (group 25), and the same number of articles had a discussion process
(group 28). In some cases, several additional processes that support arriving at conclusions were introduced: ‘reﬁnement’,
‘reﬁne theory’, celebration’, ‘construction’, ‘reasoning with models’, and ‘problem solving and developing course/
experiment’(groups22–24).Theconclusionanddiscussionprocessesoccasionallyoverlapped.Sometimesconclusionsfollowed
discussion or communication (a term that was often used in descriptions of discussion), but most frequently, conclusions
were based on investigation and analysis and later communicated to others. Therefore, it was still possible to emphasize
these two as separate phases of inquiry-based learning. The Conclusion phase was characterized using the following terms:
‘my conclusions’, ‘ﬁnding relationships and drawing conclusions’, ‘inference’, ‘conclusion’, ‘devise explanations or mecha-
nisms for the patterns’, ‘report’, ‘draw(ing) conclusions’, ‘conclusion/evaluation’, ‘learner connects explanations to scientiﬁc
knowledge’, ‘drawing inferences and conclusions and justifying them’, ‘drawing conclusions and making judgments based
on them’ (group 25). Within these descriptions, ‘conclusion’ was a recurring term, and it was used in the inquiry-based learn-
ing framework synthesized in the current study.
The Discussion phase was elaborated through the following terms: ‘discuss’, ‘debate’, ‘share and discuss my inquiry’, ‘dis-
cussing with others’, ‘communicating new understanding’, ‘elaborate’, ‘communicating results’, ‘argument’, ‘discussion and
presentation of new content’, ‘communication’, ‘learner communicates and justiﬁes explanations’, ‘present inquiry’ (group
28). Discussion and communication were both very common in the list of terms used to describe this process. However,
communication sometimes indicated only a unidirectional process where a student communicates his/her conclusions to
others, but discussion was always seen as a wider bidirectional process. Therefore, we decided to use the term ‘Discussion’
to describe the ﬁfth general phase of the inquiry cycle.
While some authors saw the potential for either Conclusion or Discussion to be the ﬁnal phase of the inquiry cycle, several
other authors indicated that conclusions should be veriﬁed and/or generalized through discussion and other speciﬁc ac-
tivities. Therefore, Discussion can be seen as a separate ﬁnal phase of the inquiry cycle. However, it could also be seen as a
phase that is conducted in parallel with Conclusion or all other phases where the information gathered in a phase needs
discussion. Discussion among students throughout an inquiry enactment becomes more apparent when the inquiry activi-
ties at task require collaboration. Our analysis revealed four articles that distinguished a phase for generating generalizations
based on the conclusions: ‘offer solutions’, ‘generate theory’, and ‘model’ (group 26); however, these overlapped with the
phase of conclusion. In eight studies, emphasis was placed on evaluating inquiry-based learning, using the terms ‘evaluat-
ing success’, ‘evaluate’, ‘evaluation’, ‘evaluate action’, ‘evaluate inquiry’, ‘comparing new knowledge to prior knowledge’, ‘test
the explanations’ (group 27). Evaluation can be considered to be a process relating to conclusion or reﬂection (
Leijen, Valtna,
Leijen, & Pedaste, 2012). Therefore, evaluation of inquiry-based learning is positioned as a process falling between the Con-
clusion and Discussion phases (in particular, between the Conclusion phase and the Reﬂection sub-phase). In addition, based
on ﬁve of the articles analyzed in the current study, Reﬂection can be distinguished as a separate inquiry sub-phase, cap-
turedbytermssuchas‘reﬂect’,‘reasoningwithevidenceaboutphenomenon’,and‘reﬂection’(group29).Oneof thedistinctions
between Communication and Reﬂection as sub-phases of Discussion concerns the object that is being communicated or
discussed. Communication will probably be more related to experimentation or exploration outcomes, whereas reﬂection
will more often concern the processes involved. However, reﬂection-related activities sometimes also included ‘predict the
outcomes of new experiments’, ‘prediction’, ‘decision’, ‘preservation’ (groups 30–32). Thus, it was reasonable to introduce
Reﬂection as one of the sub-phases of the Discussion phase of the general inquiry cycle. In this case, Communication is a
discussion process between a learner and his/her peers or teacher and Reﬂection is regarded as an inner discussion of the
learner.
The articles analyzed in the current study supported the distinction of two more future-oriented stages (groups 33 and
34) which, however, were not directly related to inquiry-based learning and were therefore not included as inquiry cycle
processes synthesized in the current work. These processes were labeled as ‘apply’, ‘applying knowledge to new situa-
tions’, ‘application and expansion’, ‘apply new knowledge to solve practical problems’ or ‘new/future inquiries’, and ‘starting
new questions to investigate’.
In conclusion, based on the initial analysis, eleven common and most frequently seen (based on the number of articles
in which particular terms were used) phases were identiﬁed, in the following order based on the sequence of the inquiry
cycle: Orientation, Questioning, Hypothesis Generation, Planning, Observation, Investigation, Analysis, Conclusion, Discus-
sion, Communication, and Reﬂection. However, it was not practical to retain 11 phases, because inquiry-based learning is
often referred as a complex and diﬃcult learning process for the learners (
de Jong & van Joolingen, 1998; Veermans, van
Joolingen, & de Jong, 2006) and therefore, a smaller number of phases helps to better present the whole inquiry-based learn-
ing.Theinitiallistof 11inquiryphaseswasreduced,notbyeliminatinganyparticularphase,butbydoinganin-depthanalysis
as described earlier to organize similar phases into groups (e.g., Planning, Observation, and Analysis were re-grouped under
53M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Exploration, Experimentation, and Data Interpretation and all three of these sub-phases were grouped under Investigation,
as described earlier).
3.2. Descriptions of general inquiry phases
The analysis of the descriptions and the deﬁnitions of inquiry phases presented in the articles reviewed led to a new
inquiry-based learning framework that includes ﬁve general inquiry phases (seeTable1 for deﬁnitions): Orientation, Con-
ceptualization, Investigation, Conclusion, and Discussion. In general, this cycle is similar to several others; however, it uses
termsthathavebeenextractedascoretermsfromthearticlesfoundinthisreview,anditcoverstheprocessesbehindmost
of the inquiry phases described in these articles. Further, it can be expected that this cycle also covers many inquiry-based
learning frameworks that were not found in the current search and might therefore be compatible with teachers’ current
understanding of inquiry-based learning and help to structure their teaching according to this framework of learners’ pro-
cesses.Forexample,
deJong(2006b) alsoprovidedaninquirycyclethatconsistsofﬁvegeneralphasesandafewsub-phases.
Inhiswork,thegeneralphaseswereOrientation,HypothesisGeneration,Experimentation,DrawingaConclusion,andMaking
anEvaluation.Experimentationhadsub-phasesof experimentdesign,prediction,anddatainterpretation.Inournewcycle,
Conceptualization is broader than Hypothesis Generation as it also involves an additional sub-phase, Questioning. Investi-
gation is broader and involves Exploration in addition to Experimentation and Data Interpretation. Discussion is broader
than Making an Evaluation, including both Reﬂection (which contains description, critique, evaluation, and discussion in a
narrowcontextofreﬂection,see
Leijenetal.,2012 )andCommunicationaboutﬁndings.Otherinquiry-basedlearningframe-
works can similarly be seen as falling within the framework proposed in the current study. In order to enable that type of
comparison,thissectionelaboratesonthedescriptionsofphasesandsub-phasesofthenewinquiry-basedlearningframework.
Orientationfocuses on stimulating interest and curiosity in relation to the problem at hand. During this phase the learn-
ingtopicisintroducedbytheenvironmentorgivenbytheteacherordeﬁnedbythelearner(
Scanlon,Anastopoulou,Kerawalla,
& Mulholland, 2011). The main variables of the domain are identiﬁed during the Orientation phase, and its outcome is a
problem statement.
Conceptualization is a process of understanding a concept or concepts belonging to the stated problem. It is divided into
two sub-phases, Questioning and Hypothesis Generation. These sub-phases yield similar yet distinguishable outcomes: Ques-
tioning arrives at a research question or more open questions about a domain, while Hypothesis Generation arrives at a
testable hypothesis. Both of these are based on theoretical justiﬁcation and contain independent and dependent variables,
but have one key difference – the hypothesized direction of the relation between variables given in the hypothesis is not
present in the case of a research question (
Mäeots et al., 2008). In general, hypothesizing is a formulation of a statement or
a set of statements (de Jong, 2006a), while questioning is a formulation of investigable questions (White & Frederiksen, 1998).
Thus, the outcomes of the Conceptualization phase are research questions or hypotheses to be investigated or both if ﬁrst
research questions are formulated and then hypotheses are generated based on these.
Investigation is the phase where curiosity is turned into action in order to respond to the stated research questions
or hypotheses (
Scanlon et al., 2011). The sub-phases of Investigation are Exploration, Experimentation, and Data
Table 1
Phases and sub-phases of the synthesized inquiry-based learning framework.
General phases Deﬁnition Sub-phases Deﬁnition
Orientation The process of stimulating curiosity about a topic
and addressing a learning challenge through a
problem statement
Conceptualization The process of stating theory-based questions and/
or hypotheses.
Questioning The process of generating research questions
based on the stated problem.
Hypothesis Generation The process of generating hypotheses regarding
the stated problem.
Investigation The process of planning exploration or
experimentation, collecting and analysing data
based on the experimental design or exploration.
Exploration The process of systematic and planned data
generation on the basis of a research question.
Experimentation The process of designing and conducting an
experiment in order to test a hypothesis.
Data Interpretation The process of making meaning out of collected
data and synthesizing new knowledge.
Conclusion The process of drawing conclusions from the data.
Comparing inferences made based on data with
hypotheses or research questions.
Discussion The process of presenting ﬁndings of particular
phases or the whole inquiry cycle by
communicating with others and/or controlling the
whole learning process or its phases by engaging
in reﬂective activities.
Communication The process of presenting outcomes of an inquiry
phase or of the whole inquiry cycle to others
(peers, teachers) and collecting feedback from
them. Discussion with others.
Reﬂection The process of describing, critiquing, evaluating
and discussing the whole inquiry cycle or a speciﬁc
phase. Inner discussion.
54 M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Interpretation. Students explore/observe, design different experiments by changing variable values, make predictions, and
interpret outcomes (de Jong, 2006a; Lim, 2004; White & Frederiksen, 2005). In general, exploration is a systematic way of
carrying out an investigation with the intention of ﬁnding a relation among the variables involved (Lim, 2004). In this case
there is no need for stating a hypothesis, but careful planning is still needed in order to save resources (e.g., time, materi-
als, money). However, experimentation concentrates on making and applying a strategic plan for the experiment with a
speciﬁc timeline, and it naturally follows from the Hypothesis Generation phase. In this case evidence for testing a hypoth-
esis will be collected and in planning the experiment the variables that should be kept constant or varied in conducting an
experiment should be deﬁned. Both Exploration and Experimentation involve the design and implementation of the inves-
tigative activities, and an intermediate outcome is the design or plan of the exploration or experiment. For example, if the
domain requires speciﬁc equipment or materials to be used, the choice of the materials and equipment is part of the design
developed during the Exploration or Experimentation phase. During Exploration and Experimentation data will be collect-
ed. The Data Interpretation sub-phase is focused on making meaning out of collected data and synthesis of new
knowledge (
Bruce & Casey, 2012; Justice et al., 2002; Lim, 2004; White & Frederiksen, 1998; Wilhelm & Walters, 2006). The
ﬁnal outcome of the Investigation phase is an interpretation of the data (a formulation of the relations between variables)
that will permit returning to the original research question or hypothesis and drawing a conclusion regarding what was
asked or hypothesized.
Conclusionis the phase in which the basic conclusions of a study are stated (
de Jong, 2006a). In this phase learners address
their original research questions or hypotheses and consider whether these are answered or supported by the results of
the study (
Scanlon et al., 2011; White, Shimoda, & Frederiksen, 1999). It may lead to new theoretical insights. The outcome
of the Conclusion phase is a ﬁnal conclusion about the ﬁndings of inquiry-based learning, responding to the research ques-
tions or hypotheses.
Discussioncontains the sub-phases of Communication and Reﬂection. Communication can be seen as an external process
where students present and communicate their ﬁndings and conclusions to others, and receive feedback and comments
from others (see
Scanlon et al., 2011) and sometimes listen to others and articulate one’s own understandings (Bruce & Casey,
2012). Reﬂection is deﬁned as the process of reﬂecting on anything in the learner’s mind, e.g., on the success of the inquiry
processorcyclewhileproposingnewproblemsforanewinquirycycleandsuggestinghowtheinquiry-basedlearningprocess
could be improved (
Lim, 2004; White & Frederiksen, 1998). It is mainly viewed as an internal process (What did I do? Why
did I do so? Did I do well? What are the other options in a similar situation?). Within this process, several activities, such
as role-play, writing a diary or narrative, and guiding questions, can be distinguished as support for this (
Runnel, Pedaste,
& Leijen, 2013), and these can help students’ reﬂections to reach speciﬁc levels of quality: description, justiﬁcation, cri-
tique, and discussion (Leijen et al., 2012). Thus, reﬂection is often more focused on the inquiry-based learning process and
communication on domain-related outcomes of this process. Both Discussion sub-phases can be seen as occurring at two
possible levels: (1) communicating or reﬂecting on the whole process at the end of the inquiry-based learning or (2) in re-
lation to a single phase in the cycle.
3.3. Inquiry-based learning framework
Based on the overview of the proposed inquiry phases and sub-phases and their deﬁnitions, an inquiry-based
learning framework was developed (see
Fig. 3). The arrows in Fig. 3 demonstrate different pathways through the
framework. Although the cycle often (in 13 articles out of 32 reviewed in our study) starts with Orientation, it displays
ﬂexibility in the pathways that can be followed. Three possible inquiry cycles can be traced by following the arrows: (a)
Orientation–Questioning–Exploration–Data Interpretation (possibility in the cycle to go back to Questioning)–Conclusion;
(b) Orientation–Hypothesis Generation–Experimentation–Data Interpretation (possibility in the cycle to go back to Hypoth-
esis Generation)–Conclusion; and (c) Orientation–Questioning–Hypothesis Generation–Experimentation–Data Interpretation
(possibility in the cycle to go back to Questioning or Hypothesis Generation)–Conclusion. Even more ﬂexibility can be created
by linking the framework with design-based research (
Barab & Squire, 2004). In this case the research could start in the
Conceptualization phase and have several short cycles between the Conceptualization phase and the Investigation phase.
However, for design-based research the investigation phase should not test a model or theory under development but dif-
ferentfeaturesof thenaturalisticenvironmentwherethetheory/modelshouldwork.Aftercollecting‘backgroundinformation’
the learner (or researcher) could turn back to the Conceptualization phase to test the model/theory in mind. If, after several
loops, the ‘notional test’ is successful, then the theory or model itself could be tested.
TheDiscussionphasecanbeseenasasetof processesthatare“optional”fortheinquirycycle,becauseforanindividuallearner,
inquiry-based learning outcomes can often be arrived at without any Communication or Reﬂection. However, the quality of the
wholeinquiry-basedlearninganditsrelatedlearninggainscandependonthediscussionsduringeachinquiryphaseand/orafter
completingallof theotherphases.SeveralauthorshaveincludedDiscussionasaculminatinginquiryphase(
Bruce&Casey,2012;
Conole, Scanlon, Littleton, Kerawalla, & Mulholland, 2010; Valanides & Angeli, 2008), while others consider Conclusion as the
ﬁnal stage of an inquiry cycle (de Jong & van Joolingen, 2008; National Research Council, 1996; Tatar, 2012).
Based on our framework we recommend starting the inquiry-based learning process with Orientation, where students
not only get an idea about the topic to be investigated but are also introduced to the problem to be solved. If students’ cu-
riosity is already raised from previous studies or interests, this phase is often not needed (which is especially the case with
55M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
researchers doing research). In the following step, students have different possibilities for forming the key concept to be
studied in the inquiry-based learning process: hypothesis-driven approach or question-driven approach. If the students have
no speciﬁc idea and only a general plan of what to explore, they should start from more open question(s) that guide them
to the exploration of a phenomenon (data-driven approach, pathway ‘a’). In this case, it is expected that students will return
to the Conceptualization phase if they have speciﬁed, revised or derived new ideas from the Exploration phase or data gath-
ered, but they can also move directly from Exploration to Data Interpretation and Conclusion. If the students have a more
speciﬁc, often theory-based idea about what to investigate, then a hypothesis-driven approach is suitable (‘b’). A slight de-
viation from the latter could be the question-driven approach, where students have a question and their next goal is to collect
background information for stating a speciﬁc hypothesis as a possible answer to the question (‘c’). In conclusion, the three
suggested but not the only possible pathways are the following:
(a) Orientation–Questioning–Exploration–Questioning–Exploration–Data Interpretation–Conclusion (the loop between
Questioning and Exploration can be repeated several times, but it is also possible to move directly from the ﬁrst Ex-
ploration to Data Interpretation; Communication and Reﬂection can be added to every phase);
(b) Orientation–Hypothesis Generation–Experimentation–Data Interpretation–Hypothesis Generation–Experimentation–
Data Interpretation–Conclusion (the loop between Hypothesis Generation–Experimentation–Data Interpretation can
be repeated several times, but it is also possible to move directly from the ﬁrst Data Interpretation to Conclusion;
Communication and Reﬂection can be added to every phase);
(c) Orientation–Questioning–Hypothesis Generation–Experimentation–Data Interpretation–(Questioning) Hypothesis
Generation–Experimentation–Data Interpretation–Conclusion (the loop between Hypothesis Generation–
Experimentation–Data Interpretation can be repeated several times, but it is also possible to move directly from the
ﬁrst Data Interpretation to Conclusion; after Data Interpretation it might be necessary to revise Questions, but more
often only Hypotheses are revised; Communication and Reﬂection can be added to every phase).
ThepathwayintheInvestigationphasedependsprimarilyontheactionstakenduringtheConceptualizationphase.TheQues-
tioning sub-phase can precede the Hypothesis Generation and/or the Exploration sub-phases. In both Exploration and
Experimentation
Questioning Hypothesis
Generation
Exploration
Data 
Interpretation
Conclusion
Communication
Reflection
ORIENTATIONCONCEPTUALIZATIONINVESTIGATIONCONCLUSION
Orientation
DISCUSSION
Fig. 3. Inquiry-based learning framework (general phases, sub-phases, and their relations).
56 M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Experimentation, planning is an important activity to avoid inappropriate use of resources, such as time, materials, and
money. Data Interpretation is the next step after either the Exploration or Experimentation sub-phases where data are
collected. Here students analyze data according to a speciﬁc strategy and method planned in the Exploration or
Experimentation sub-phases and make their ﬁrst interpretations of the data. From Data Interpretation, it is possible to move
forward to the Conclusion phase or go back to the Conceptualization phase to revise existing or deﬁne new questions or
hypotheses, which makes inquiry-based learning a cyclical process. If some issues have been discovered in Exploration or Ex-
perimentation, it might be a good idea to turn back to change the plan or experiment design made in a particular sub-phase
without changing research questions or hypotheses. If a student collected enough data for conﬁrming his or her hypothesis or
foransweringthestatedquestion(s),thenheorshemayproceedtothenextphaseforstatingﬁnalconclusions.Thesearestated
in the Conclusion phase, where the outcomes of the Investigation phase are compared with the output of the Conceptualization
phase. In case the data-collection was not as successful as planned (according to the ﬁndings in the Data Interpretation sub-
phase), the student can go back to the Conceptualization phase to re-state a question or hypothesis, which serves as new input
for the Investigation phase. In this case, the results of Data Interpretation serve the student as new theoretical knowledge for
him/hertoformulatequestionsorhypotheses.However,goingbacktotheConceptualizationphaseisnotonlyaconsequenceof
insuﬃcient or disconﬁrming data. Moving back may also be in response to new ideas that arise out of the collected data during
interpretation. Thus, inquiry-based learning can be seen as cyclical on multiple levels, and it is evident how the pathways de-
scribed in this synthesis can form different inquiry cycles. In addition, the starting point of the cycle can be ﬂexibly varied. For
example, one might start from Exploration of a phenomenon and later move to Conceptualization to formulate meaningful
hypotheses.
InallphasesfromOrientationtoConclusion,theprocessesoftheDiscussionphasearealsopossible.TheDiscussionphase
isheredeﬁnedfromlearners’perspectiveintheinquiry-basedlearningcontext.BothCommunicationandReﬂectioncanbe
seen as on-going processes, which help students receive feedback about their learning process by sharing their domain-
related outcomes and process-related ideas with others. This means direct communication among peer students, teacher,
etc.However,itcouldalsoinvolveguidedmonitoringofstudents’learningprocessbyusingreﬂectionactivities.Inthiscontext,
discussioncanbeseenasaprocesssupportingmeta-cognitionorregulativeprocessesof inquirylearningasproposedby
de
JongandNjoo(1992) .Twotypesofreﬂectioncanbedistinguished( Schön,1987):(a) reﬂection-in-action,wherethestudents
evaluate their study process while conducting the activities of a speciﬁc phase and collect particular information for this
whileplanningandmonitoringlearningactivitiesor(b) reﬂection-on-action,wherethestudentsevaluatetheirstudyprocess
after completing the whole inquiry cycle. In both cases, students use the results of their reﬂection to revise the activities
engaged in during speciﬁc phases (e.g., re-stating their research question) or as an input for a new inquiry cycle. Therefore,
it follows that the effect of one’s reﬂection on the success of inquiry phases or the improvement of inquiry skills is strongly
related to the quality of the reﬂection. Similarly, Communication can be viewed as ‘in-action’ communication or
‘on-action’ communication, i.e. it is either part of an inquiry phase or performed as a separate activity at the end of the
inquiry cycle.
The new inquiry-based learning framework presented in
Fig.3 broadly reﬂects a contemporary view of inquiry-based
learning. It is derived from a systematic review of inquiry-based learning frameworks found in the educational research
literature and is an attempt to cover many different implementations of inquiry-based learning. Early frameworks of inquiry-
based learning may have neglected meta-cognitive processes, which in
Fig.3 are found in the Discussion phase and are also
in connection with the four transformative general inquiry phases. The possibility that inquiry-based learning may primar-
ily follow an inductive or deductive reasoning approach, as
Klahr and Dunbar (1988)discuss, is captured inFig.3 through
the use of various sub-phases within the Conceptualization and Investigation phases. However, the framework is not limited
to either one approach since the pathways connecting phases in
Fig.3 allow for iterations and cyclical movement, thereby
increasing the range of possible inquiry process implementations. Overall, the framework brings together core elements of
inquiry-based learning and connects them in such a way as to show that multiple implementations of inquiry cycles can
develop out of a single framework.
4. Conclusions
The main goal of the current study was to provide instructional designers and teachers with a synthesized inquiry-
based learning framework from learners’ perspective that can be used to ensure an effective inquiry-based learning process.
In a number of other studies in the past, many alternative inquiry cycles have been introduced containing an unreasonably
high number of different terms to describe the various inquiry activities. This made it hard for novice designers and teach-
ers to understand which are the core phases and processes of inquiry-based learning. Without this information, their ﬁrst
attempts to achieve generally effective inquiry-based learning for students could lead to failure. Therefore, in the current
study a systematic literature review was conducted in order to identify and summarize the core features of the inquiry-
based learning process and to synthesize a framework that combines the strengths of existing inquiry-based learning
frameworks. It is expected that the use of the new framework extracted from the literature review can be the key to success
in implementing inquiry-based learning effectively.
The inquiry-based learning framework proposed in the current study on the basis of the analysis of the literature con-
sists of ﬁve general phases and nine sub-phases for inquiry-based learning. These inquiry phases and related processes can
57M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
be organized in different pathways that could be followed when designing speciﬁc learning situations. The basic version
starts from the Conceptualization phase, where students have the option to move on to the Investigation phase through
generating either questions or hypotheses. A set of questions is needed to make a plan and begin with exploration, while a
hypothesis-driven approach guides students to more structured experimentation in the Investigation phase. In addition, a
particular inquiry cycle can be adapted by placing different emphases on the Discussion phase. In the simplest case, stu-
dents could just present their inquiry-based conclusions to others, while in a more sophisticated process communication
and reﬂection could be important processes that are invoked in every general inquiry phase as well as at the end of a learn-
ing cycle. For example, students, by themselves or in a group of peers, can discuss their learning process and outcomes of
the Conceptualization phase before moving on to Investigation.
The value of this synthesized framework lies in the possibility that it could form the basis for a general structure of
inquiry-based learning environments (such as Go-Lab,
http://www.golabz.eu/ , SCY-Lab, http://scy-net.eu/ or Ark of
Inquiry, http://arkoﬁnquiry.eu/), which provides teachers and students with structured and scaffolded inquiry activities.
The synthesized framework takes into account the strengths of the reviewed studies and avoids rare variations. The
framework supports structuring the complex inquiry-based learning process and, eventually, designing guidance that is
necessary in order to enhance the eﬃciency of the learning process. Thus, it can be argued that this framework could be
applied widely in designing inquiry cycles in the context of both virtual and real-world environments. In this context
it can also be a guide for teachers. For example, the phases identiﬁed in the framework can be seen as different stages in
the learning process that are characterized by their input, actions, and output. In this way, the inquiry-based learning
framework supports teachers and designers in analyzing what is needed as input by the learners in each stage and what is
the expected output. In a structured learning environment there are two options for the designers. One is to provide all
input information, guidance for actions, and information about expected outcomes to the learners when they “enter” a par-
ticular phase. Another option is to leave more freedom to the learners while guiding them toward a productive learning
process based on the speciﬁc issues that have been detected during the learning process. In the ﬁrst case, the framework
could be applied for designing the main structure of the learning environment, while in the second case, it is important to
take into account students’ needs that should frame the design and content principles of supportive elements of a learning
environment.
Acknowledgements
The reported work was partially funded by the European Union in the context of the Go-Lab project (Grant Agreement
no. 317601) under the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) theme of the 7
th Framework Programme for R&D
(FP7). This document does not represent the opinion of the European Union, and the European Union is not responsible for
any use that might be made of its content. We would like to acknowledge the Go-Lab project team members, who contrib-
uted through discussions in developing the understanding of the phases and their relations in inquiry-learning cycle – Anjo
Anjewierden, Sten Govaerts, Eﬃe Lai-Chong Law, Nikos Zygouritsas.
Appendix A. Articles used in the analysis of inquiry phases and inquiry cycles
Reference Level of
information
presented
Domain of
the study
List of inquiry phases (reference included if cycle derived from another source)
Banerjee (2010) Phases Inquiry framework Learner investigates scientiﬁcally oriented questions, Learner gives priority to evidence
in responding to questions, Learner formulates explanations from evidence, Learner
connects explanations to scientiﬁc knowledge, Learner communicates and justiﬁes
explanations
Bell, Urhahne, Schanze,
& Ploetzner (2010)
Phases +Cycle Collaborative
inquiry learning;
Inquiry framework
Orientation/question, Hypothesis generation, Planning, Investigation, Analysis/
interpretation, Model, Conclusion/evaluation, Communication, Prediction
Bevevino, Dengel, &
Adams (1999)
Phases Constructivist
theory in the
classroom
Exploration, Discussion and presentation of new content, Application and expansion
Bruce & Casey (2012) Phases Digital literacy Ask, Investigate, Create, Discuss, Reﬂect ( Bruce & Bishop, 2002;Community of
Informatics Initiative (CII, 2009)
Conole et al. (2010) Phases Healthy eating Find my topic, Decide my inquiry question or hypothesis, Plan my methods, equipment
and actions, Collect my evidence, Analyse and represent my evidence, My conclusions,
Share and discuss my inquiry (
Anastopoulou et al., 2009)
Çorlu & Çorlu (2012) Phases Physics teachers Identifying the problem, Analysing, Setting hypotheses, Generating a synthesis, Problem
solving and developing a course/experiment
Etkina et al. (2010) Phases Physics Observe, Find patterns, Devise explanations or mechanisms for the patterns, Test the
explanations, Predict the outcomes of new experiments, Apply new knowledge to solve
practical problems (
Etkina & van Heuvelen, 2007)
Friedman et al. (2010) Phases +Cycle Higher education Ask, Investigate, Create, Discuss, Reﬂect (Community of Informatics Initiative (CII, 2009)
Gilbert (2009) Phases +Cycle Early childhood 5E Inquiry Cycle: Engage, Explore, Explain, Elaborate, Evaluate (Llewellyn, 2002)
58 M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Appendix A. (Continued)
Reference Level of
information
presented
Domain of
the study
List of inquiry phases (reference included if cycle derived from another source)
Gunawardena et al.
(2006)
Phases Instructional
design model
Learning challenge (i.e., a case, problem, or an issue), Initial exploration, Resources,
Reﬂection, Preservation
Gutwill & Allen (2012) Phases Science learning in
museums
Asking questions, Making predictions, Designing experiments, Analysing data,
Reasoning with models, Drawing conclusions, Communicating results (e.g.,
Minstrell & van Zee, 2000; White & Frederiksen, 1998)
Kuhn & Dean (2008) Phases Educationally
disadvantaged,
low-achieving
middle-school
students
Intent (identifying the question to be asked), Analysis (designing an investigation, and
interpreting data), Inference (drawing conclusions), Argument (entering claims into
scientiﬁc discourse) (
Kuhn, 2001, 2002, 2005)
Kuhn & Pease (2008) Phases Middle-school
students
Identiﬁcation of a question or questions, Design of an investigation to address them,
Examination and analysis of empirical data, Drawing inferences and conclusions and
justifying them (
Klahr, 2000; National Research Council, 1996), Identifying a question,
Accessing data of their choice to address the question, Analysing these data to identify
patterns and make inferences, Drawing conclusions and making judgments based on
them
Larotta (2007) Phases Inquiry in the adult
classroom
Observe, Wonder, Explain, Generate Theory
Lim (2004) Phases +Cycle Designing inquiries
on the web
Ask, Plan, Explore, Construct, Reﬂect
Meyerson & Secules
(2001)
Phases Social studies Anchor, Generate, Research, Debate, Offer solution
Palincsar, Collins,
Marano, &
Magnusson (2000
)
Phases Learning
disabilities
Engage, Investigate, Explain, Report
Popov & Tevel (2007) Phases Physics Question, Predict, Experiment, Model, Apply ( White & Frederiksen, 2000)
Li, Moorman, & Dyjur
(2010)
Phases +Cycle Mathematics Ask, Investigate, Create, Discuss, Reﬂect ( Community of Informatics Initiative
(CII, 2009)
Scanlon et al. (2011) Phases Technology Orientation, Set up inquiry question, Plan question, Conduct investigation, Analyse
evidence, Draw conclusions, Present inquiry, Evaluate inquiry (e.g.White et al., 1999)
Smyrnaiou, Foteini, &
Kynigos (2012)
Phases Physics Orientation, Hypothesis generation, Experimentation, Conclusion ( de Jong & van
Joolingen, 2008)
Spronken-Smith &
Kingham (2009)
Phases Geography Developing a question, Determining what needs to be known, Identifying resources,
Gathering data, Assessing data, Synthesizing, Communicating new understandings,
Evaluating success (
Justice et al., 2002)
Steinke & Fitch (2011) Phases Higher education Theory, Generate testable hypotheses, Collect and analyze data, Reﬁne theory
(Kantowitz, Roediger, & Elmes, 2009)
Tatar (2012) Phases Science
laboratories
Ask questions, Design studies, Collect and interpret data, Draw conclusions (National
Research Council, 1996)
Valanides & Angeli
(2008)
Phases Science Conducting observation, Recording and organizing data, Discussing with others,
Drawing conclusions, Reasoning with evidence about a phenomenon
van Joolingen, de Jong,
& Dimitrakopoulou
(2007
)
Phases Science Orientation, Hypothesis generation, Experimentation, Conclusion, Evaluation ( de Jong,
2006a)
Wall, Higgins, Glasner,
Mahmout, &
Gormally (2009
)
Phases +Cycle Learning to learn Cycle1: Deﬁne problem, Assess needs, Hypothesise ideas, Develop action plan,
Implement plan, Evaluate action, Decisions (Reﬂect, Explain, Understand action)
Cycle 2: Redeﬁne problem, Assess needs, Develop new hypothesis, Revise action plan,
Implement revised plan, Evaluate action, Decisions (Reﬂect, Explain, Understand action)
(adapted from
Kemmis & McTaggart, 1988)
Wecker, Kohnle, &
Fischer (2007)
Phases Computer literacy Hypothesis generation, Experiment design, Data interpretation ( de Jong &
van Joolingen, 1998; Schwartz, Lin, Brophy, & Bransford, 1999; van Joolingen, de Jong,
Lazonder, Savelsbergh, & Manlove, 2005
)
White & Frederiksen
(2005)
Phases +Cycle Mathematics Question, Hypothesize, Investigate, Analyse, Model, Evaluate ( White & Frederiksen,
1998)
Wilhelm & Walters
(2006)
Phases +Cycle Mathematics
Science
Llewelyn’s Inquiry Model: Introducing a topic, Assessing prior knowledge, Providing
exploration, Raising and revising questions, Brainstorming solutions, Carrying out a
plan, Collecting data, Organizing data, Finding relationships and drawing conclusions,
Communicating results, Comparing new knowledge to prior knowledge, Applying
knowledge to new situations, Stating a new question to investigate (
Llewellyn, 2002)
Youngquist &
Pataray-Ching (2004)
Phases Early childhood
classroom
Observation, Initial inquiry question, Sign system exploration, Analysis,
Transmediation, Reﬁnement, Celebration, New/further inquiries (adapted fromShort,
Harste, & Burke, 1996)
Zhang & Quintana
(2012)
Phases Online inquiry,
middle school
Online inquiry: Generating a scientiﬁc question (driving question), Searching for
information on the web, Evaluating and making sense of online information,
Integrating different pieces of information to answer the driving question (
Quintana,
Zhang, & Krajcik, 2005)
59M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
References
Alﬁeri, L., Brooks, P. J., Aldrich, N. J., & Tenenbaum, H. R. (2011). Does discovery-based instruction enhance learning? Journal of Educational Psychology,
103, 1–18. doi:10.1037/a0021017.
Anastopoulou, S., Kerwalla, L., Littleton, K., Ainsworth, S., Twiner, A., & Conole, G. (2009).Facilitating the expression of learner voices in the participatory design
of technology to support inquiry learning. Paper presented at the CAL 2009 Learning in Digital Worlds, March 2009, Brighton, UK.<http://oro.open.ac.uk/
22307/>.
Banerjee, A. (2010). Teaching science using guided inquiry as the central theme: a professional development model for high school science teachers.Science
Educator, 19, 1–9.
Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: putting a stake in the ground. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 1–14.
Bell,T.,Urhahne,D.,Schanze,S.,&Ploetzner,R.(2010).Collaborativeinquirylearning:models,tools,andchallenges.InternationalJournalo f ScienceEducation,
32, 349–377. doi:10.1080/09500690802582241.
Bevevino, M., Dengel, J., & Adams, K. (1999). Constructivist theory in the classroom. internalizing concepts through inquiry learning. The Clearing House:
A Journal of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 72, 275–278.<http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00098659909599406>.
Bruce, B. C., & Bishop, A. P. (2002). Using the web to support inquiry-based literacy development. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 45, 706–
714.
Bruce, B. C., & Casey, L. (2012). The practice of inquiry: a pedagogical ‘sweet spot’ for digital literacy? Computers in the Schools, 29, 191–206.
doi:10.1080/07380569.2012.657994.
Bybee, R., Taylor, J. A., Gardner, A., van Scotter, P., Carlson, J., Westbrook, A., et al. (2006). The BSCS 5E instructional model: Origins and effectiveness. Colorado
Springs, CO: BSCS.
Community of Informatics Initiative (CII). (2009).Inquiry based learning cycle. <http://www.inquiry.uiuc.edu/>Retrieved 25.03.13.
Conole, G., Scanlon, E., Littleton, K., Kerawalla, L., & Mulholland, P. (2010). Personal inquiry: innovations in participatory design and models for inquiry
learning. Educational Media International, 47, 277–292. doi:10.1080/09523987.2010.535328.
Çorlu, M. A., & Çorlu, M. S. (2012). Scientiﬁc inquiry based professional development models in teacher education. Educational Sciences: Theory & Practice,
12, 514–521.
de Groot, A. (1969). Methodology: Foundations of inference and research in the behavioral sciences. Paris: Mouton & Co.
de Jong, T. (2006a). Computer simulations – technological advances in inquiry learning. Science, 312, 532–533. doi:10.1126/science.1127750.
de Jong, T. (2006b). Scaffolds for scientiﬁc discovery learning. In J. Elen & R. E. Clark (Eds.), Dealing with complexity in learning environments (pp. 107–128).
London: Elsevier Science Publishers.
de Jong, T., & Njoo, M. (1992). Learning and instruction with computer simulations: learning processes involved. In E. de Corte, M. Linn, H. Mandl, & L.
Verschaffel (Eds.), Computer-based learning environments and problem solving (pp. 411–429). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
de Jong, T., Sotiriou, S., & Gillet, D. (2014). Innovations in STEM education: the Go-Lab federation of online labs. Smart Learning Environments, 1, 3.
de Jong, T., & van Joolingen, W. R. (1998). Scientiﬁc discovery learning with computer simulations of conceptual domains. Review of Educational Research,
68, 179–202. doi:10.2307/1170753.
de Jong, T., & van Joolingen, W. R. (2008). Model-facilitated learning. In J. M. Spector, M. D. Merrill, J. van Merriënboer, & M. P. Driscoll (Eds.), Handbook of
research on educational communications and technology (3rd ed., pp. 457–468). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum.
deJong,T.,vanJoolingen,W.R.,Giezma,A.,Girault,I.,Hoppe,U.,Kindermann,J.,etal.(2010).Learningbycreatingandexchangingobjects:theS CYexperience.
British Journal of Educational Technology, 41, 909–921. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2010.01121.x.
Dewey, J. (1933). How we think. Boston: Heath.
Etkina, E., Karelina, A., Ruibal-Villasenor, M., Rosengrant, D., Jordan, R., & Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2010). Design and reﬂection help students develop scientiﬁc
abilities: learning in introductory physics laboratories. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 54–98. doi:10.1080/10508400903452876.
Etkina, E., & van Heuvelen, A. (2007). Investigative science learning environment – a science process approach to learning physics. In E. F. Redish & P. Cooney
(Eds.), PER-based reforms in calculus-based physics (Vol. 1, pp. 1–48). College Park, MD: American Association of Physics Teachers.
European Commission (2007). Science education now: A renewed pedagogy for the future of Europe. Brussels: European Commission. [Retrieved 03.14],
<http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/document_library/pdf_06/report-rocard-on-science-education_en.pdf>.
European Commission (2011). Towards responsible research and innovation in the information and communication technologies and security technologies
ﬁeld. Brussels: European Commission. [Retrieved 03.14], <http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/document_library/pdf_06/mep-rapport-
2011_en.pdf>.
Friedman, D. B., Crews, T. B., Caicedo, J. M., Besley, J. C., Weinberg, J., & Freeman, M. L. (2010). An exploration into inquiry-based learning by a multidisciplinary
group of higher education faculty. Higher Education, 59, 765–783. doi:10.1007/s10734-009-9279-9.
Furtak,E.M.,Seidel,T.,Iverson,H.,&Briggs,D.C.(2012).Experimentalandquasi-experimentalstudiesof inquiry-basedscienceteaching.Revi ewof Educational
Research, 82, 300–329. doi:10.3102/0034654312457206.
Gilbert,A.(2009).UtilizingsciencephilosophystatementstofacilitateK-3teachercandidates’developmentof inquiry-basedsciencepractice .EarlyChildhood
Education, 36, 431–438. doi:10.1007/s10643-009-0302-7.
Gunawardena, C. N., Ortegano-Layne, L., Carabajal, K., Frechette, C., Lindemann, K., & Jennings, B. (2006). New model, new strategies: instructional design
for building online wisdom communities. Distance Education, 27, 217–232. doi:10.1080/01587910600789613.
Gutwill, J. P., & Allen, S. (2012). Deepening students’ scientiﬁc inquiry skills during a science museum ﬁeld trip. Journal of the Learning Sciences,21, 130–181.
doi:10.1080/10508406.2011.555938.
Justice, C., Warry, W., Cuneo, C. L., Inglis, S., Miller, S., Rice, J., et al. (2002). A grammar for inquiry: linking goals and methods in a collaboratively taught
social sciences inquiry course. In The Alan Blizzard Award paper: The award winning papers. Windsor: Special Publication of the Society for Teaching
and Learning in Higher Education and McGraw-Hill Ryerson.
Kantowitz, B. H., Roediger, H. L., & Elmes, D. G. (2009). Experimental psychology: Understanding psychological research (9th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. (1988). The action research planner. Geelong: Deakin University.
Keselman, A. (2003). Supporting inquiry learning by promoting normative understanding of multivariable causality. Journal of Research in ScienceTeaching,
40, 898–921. doi:10.1002/tea.10115.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science: The cognition and development of discovery processes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during scientiﬁc reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1–55.
Kuhn,D.(2001).Whydevelopmentdoes(anddoesn’t)occur:Evidencefromthedomainof inductivereasoning.InR.Siegler&J.McClelland(Eds.),Mech anisms
of cognitive development: Neural and behavioral perspectives (pp. 221–249). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kuhn, D. (2002). What is scientiﬁc thinking and how does it develop? In U. Goswami (Ed.), Handbook of childhood cognitive development (pp. 371–393).
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Kuhn, D. (2005). Education for thinking. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kuhn, D., & Dean, J. (2008). Scaffolded development of inquiry skills in academically disadvantaged middle-school students. Journal of Psychologyof Science
and Technology, 1, 36–50. doi:10.1891/1939-7054.1.2.36.
Kuhn, D., & Pease, M. (2008). What needs to develop in the development of inquiry skills? Cognition and Instruction, 26, 512–559. doi:10.1080/
07370000802391745.
Larotta, C. (2007). Inquiry in the adult classroom: an ESL literacy experience. Adult Learning, 18, 25–29.
Leijen, Ä., Valtna, K., Leijen, D. A. J., & Pedaste, M. (2012). How to determine the quality of students’ reﬂections? Studies in Higher Education, 37, 203–217.
doi:10.1080/03075079.2010.504814.
60 M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
Li, Q., Moorman, L., & Dyjur, P. (2010). Inquiry-based learning and e-mentoring via videoconference: a study of mathematics and science learning of Canadian
rural students. Educational Technology Research and Development, 58, 729–753. doi:10.1007/s11423-010-9156-3.
Lim, B. (2004). Challenges and issues in designing inquiry on the web. British Journal of Educational Technology, 35, 627–643. doi:10.1111/j.0007-
1013.2004.00419.x.
Llewellyn, D. (2002). Inquire within: Implementing inquiry-based science standards. Thousand Oaks, CA.: Corwin Press.
Mäeots, M., Pedaste, M., & Sarapuu, T. (2008). Transforming students’ inquiry skills with computer-based simulations. In 8th IEEE International Conference
on Advanced Learning Technologies, 1–5 July. Santander, Spain. doi:10.1109/ICALT.2008.239.
Mäeots, M., Pedaste, M., & Sarapuu, T. (2011). Interactions between inquiry processes in a Web-based learning environment. In 11th IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, 6–8 July. Athens, USA. doi:10.1109/ICALT.2011.103.
Meyerson, P., & Secules, T. (2001). Inquiry cycles can make social studies meaningful – learning about the controversy in Kosovo. The Social Studies,92,
267–271. doi:10.1080/00377990109604014.
Minner, D. D., Levy, A. J., & Century, J. (2010). Inquiry-based science instruction – what is it and does it matter? Results from a research synthesis years
1984 to 2002. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47, 474–496. doi:10.1002/tea.20347.
Minstrell, J., & van Zee, E. (Eds.), (2000). Inquiring into inquiry learning and teaching in science. Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement
of Science.
National Research Council (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (2000). Inquiry and the national science education standards. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (2006). America’s lab report: Investigations in high school science. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Palincsar, A. S., Collins, K. M., Marano, N. L., & Magnusson, S. J. (2000). Investigating the engagement and learning of students with learning disabilities in
guided inquiry science teaching. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 31, 240–251.
Pedaste, M., Mäeots, M., Leijen, Ä., & Sarapuu, S. (2012). Improving students’ inquiry skills through reﬂection and self-regulation scaffolds. Technology,
Instruction, Cognition and Learning, 9, 81–95.
Pedaste, M., & Sarapuu, T. (2006). Developing an effective support system for inquiry learning in a Web-based environment. Journal of Computer Assisted
Learning, 22(1), 47–62.
Popov, O., & Tevel, I. (2007). Developing prospective physics teachers’ skills of independent experimental work using outdoors approach. Journal of Baltic
Science Education, 6, 47–57.
Quintana,C.,Zhang,M.,&Krajcik,J.(2005).Aframeworkforsupportingmetacognitiveaspectsof onlineinquirythroughsoftware-basedscaffoldi ng.Educational
Psychologist, 40, 235–244.<http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.utlib.ee/10.1207/s15326985ep4004_5>.
Rocard, M., Csermely, P., Jorde, D., Lenzen, D., Walberg-Henrikson, H., & Hemmo, V. (2007). Science education now: A renewed pedagogy for the future of
Europe. Brussels: European Commission: Directorate-General for Research.
Runnel,M.I.,Pedaste,M.,&Leijen,A.(2013).Modelforguidingreﬂectioninthecontextof inquiry-basedscienceeducation.Journalof BalticScie nceEducation,
12, 107–118.
Scanlon,E.,Anastopoulou,S.,Kerawalla,L.,&Mulholland,P.(2011).Howtechnologyresourcescanbeusedtorepresentpersonalinquiryandsuppor tstudents’
understanding of it across contexts. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27, 516–529. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2729.2011.00414.x.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Teaching artistry through reﬂection-in-action. In Jossey-Bass higher education series:Educating the reﬂective practitioner (pp. 22–40).
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Schwartz, D. L., Lin, X., Brophy, S., & Bransford, J. D. (1999). Toward the development of ﬂexibly adaptive instructional designs. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. 2, pp. 183–213). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Short, K. G., Harste, J. C., & Burke, C. (1996). Creating classrooms for authors and inquirers (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Smyrnaiou, Z., Foteini, M., & Kynigos, C. (2012). Students’ constructionist game modeling activities as part of inquiry learning processes. Electronic Journal
of e-Learning, 10, 235–248.
Spronken-Smith, R., & Kingham, S. (2009). Strengthening teaching and research links: the case of a pollution exposure inquiry project. Journal of Geography
in Higher Education, 33, 241–253. doi:10.1080/03098260802276813.
Steinke,P.,&Fitch,P.(2011).Outcomeassessmentfromtheperspectiveof psychologicalscience:theTAIMapproach.NewDirectionsforInstitutio nalResearch,
149, 15–26. doi:10.1002/ir.377.
Tatar,N.(2012).Inquiry-basedsciencelaboratories:ananalysisof pre-serviceteachers’beliefsaboutlearningsciencethroughinquiryandthe irperformances.
Journal of Baltic Science Education, 11, 248–266.
van Joolingen, W. R., de Jong, T., & Dimitrakopoulou, A. (2007). Issues in computer supported inquiry learning in science. Journal of Computer Assisted
Learning, 23, 111–119. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2729.2006.00216.x.
vanJoolingen,W.R.,deJong,T.,Lazonder,A.W.,Savelsbergh,E.R.,&Manlove,S.(2005).Co-Lab:researchanddevelopmentof anonlinelearningenv ironment
for collaborative scientiﬁc discovery learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 671–688. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2004.10.039.
Valanides, N., & Angeli, C. (2008). Distributed cognition in a sixth-grade classroom: an attempt to overcome alternative conceptions about light and color.
Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 40, 309–336.
Veermans, K. H., van Joolingen, W. R., & de Jong, T. (2006). Using heuristics to facilitate scientiﬁc discovery learning in a simulation learning environment
in a physics domain. International Journal of Science Education, 28, 341–361. doi:10.1080/09500690500277615.
Wall, K., Higgins, S., Glasner, E., Mahmout, U., & Gormally, J. (2009). Teacher enquiry as a tool for professional development: investigating pupils’ effective
talk while learning. The Australian Educational Researcher, 36, 93–117. doi:10.1007/bf03216901.
Wecker,C.,Kohnle,C.,&Fischer,F.(2007).Computerliteracyandinquirylearning:whengeekslearnless.Journalof ComputerAssistedLearning,2 3,133–144.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2729.2006.00218.x.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. (2005). A theoretical framework and approach for fostering metacognitive development. Educational Psychologist, 40, 211–223.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: making science accessible to all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16,
3–118. doi:10.1207/s1532690xci1601_2.
White, B. Y., & Frederiksen, J. R. (2000). Metacognitive facilitation: An approach to making scientiﬁc inquiry accessible to all. In J. Minstrell & E.van Zee
(Eds.), Inquiring into inquiry, learning and teaching in science (pp. 331–370). Washington, DC.: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
White, B. Y., Shimoda, T. A., & Frederiksen, J. R. (1999). Enabling students to construct theories of collaborative inquiry and reﬂective learning: computer
support for metacognitive development. International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education, 10, 151–182.
Wilhelm,J.A.,&Walters,K.L.(2006).Pre-servicemathematicsteachersbecomefullparticipantsininquiryinvestigations.InternationalJourn alof Mathematical
Education in Science and Technology, 37, 793–804. doi:10.1080/00207390600723635.
Wilhelm, P., & Beishuizen, J. J. (2003). Content effects in self-directed inductive learning. Learning and Instruction, 13, 381–402. doi:10.1016/
S0959-
4752(02)00013-0.
Youngquist, J., & Pataray-Ching, J. (2004). Revisiting “play”: analyzing and articulating acts of inquiry. Early Childhood Education Journal, 31,171–178.
doi:10.1023/B:ECEJ.0000012135.73710.0c.
Zhang, M., & Quintana, C. (2012). Scaffolding strategies for supporting middle school students’ online inquiry processes. Computers & Education, 58, 181–196.
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2011.07.016.
61M. Pedaste et al./Educational Research Review 14 (2015) 47–61