=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Review of Educational Research
Fall 2006, Vol. 76, No. 3, pp. 413-448
Learning With Concept and
Knowledge Maps: A Meta-Analysis
John C. Nesbit and Olusola 0. Adesope
Simon Fraser University
This meta-analysis reviews experimental and quasi-experimental studies
in which students learned by constructing, modifying, or viewing node-link
diagrams. Following an exhaustive search for studies meeting specified
design criteria, 67 standardized mean difference effect sizes were extracted
from 55 studies involving 5,818participants. Students at levels ranging from
Grade 4 to postsecondary used concept maps to learn in domains such as
science, psychology, statistics, and nursing. Posttests measured recall and
transfer. Across several instructional conditions, settings, andmethodological
features, the use of concept maps was associated with increased knowledge
retention. Mean effect sizes variedfrom small to large depending on how con-
cept maps were used and on the type of comparison treatment. Significant het-
erogeneity was found in most subsets.
KEVwoRDs: concept map, graphic organizer, knowledge map, meta-analysis, node-
link map.
Concept maps (Novak & Gowin, 1984) and knowledge maps (O'Donnell,
Dansereau, & Hall, 2002) are diagrams that represent ideas as node-link assemblies.
They are often used as media for constructive learning activities and as communi-
cation aids in lectures, study materials, and collaborative learning (Cafias et al.,
2003). Over the last two decades there has been significant interest among educa-
tional researchers in the instructional use of node-link diagrams. Figure 1 shows
that the number of publications referring to concept maps, knowledge maps, or
node-link maps has greatly expanded since 1985. Through selective searches of
the ERIC and PsycINFO databases, we estimate that more than 500 peer-reviewed
articles, most published since 1997, have made substantial reference to the educa-
tional application of concept or knowledge maps.
The term graphic organizer commonly describes two-dimensional visual knowl-
edge representations, including flowcharts, timelines, and tables, that show rela-
tionships among concepts or processes by means of spatial position, connecting
lines, and intersecting figures (Alvermann, 1981; Ives & Hoy, 2003; Winn, 1991).
As described by Estes, Mills, and Barron (1969), graphic organizers were con-
ceived as an entailment of Ausubel's theory of meaningful learning, according to
which learners actively subsume new concepts within preexisting, superordinate
cognitive structures (Ausubel, 1968). Graphic organizers were first designed to
function as advance organizers, priming students for learning by activating prior
knowledge and illustrating its relationship with new concepts (Hawk, 1986).
413


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
a) c.
Ua)
.0 0 O 0
U) )
CL WL 0
0 D 0 0 0) 0 0 0
suoileoiqnd
LOC)
Z,-
LcD
-I -
00
414


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Learning With Concept and Knowledge Maps
A concept map can be regarded as a type of graphic organizer that is distin-
guished by the use of labeled nodes denoting concepts and links denoting rela-
tionships among concepts. The links in a concept map may be labeled or unlabeled,
directional or nondirectional. Although the modem flourishing of node-link dia-
grams is often viewed as an entailment of Quillian's semantic networks (Quillian,
1967), similar diagrams have been used for communication and learning since at least
the 13th century (Sowa, 2000). Dansereau and colleagues (e.g., Hall, Dansereau,
& Skaggs, 1992; Lambiotte & Dansereau, 1992; McCagg & Dansereau, 1991)
used the term knowledge map to refer to a concept map with directional links
labeled by a fixed vocabulary of symbols such as P (part) or C (characteristic).
Throughout this review, the terms concept map and map refer to node-link diagrams,
including knowledge maps.
Figure 2 was adapted from a concept map created by an undergraduate student
in an educational psychology course taught by Nesbit. For the most part, it follows
a radial tree structure in which each node, except the central root node, has one
incoming link. Teachers and students also use concept maps that differ consider-
ably from radial trees in graphical layout and numbers of incoming links.
Researchers have investigated many different ways of using concept maps. One
branch of research, pioneered by Novak and colleagues, has examined student con-
struction or modification of concept maps. This research includes studies in which
students worked individually or in groups to construct maps using information
sources such as lectures or printed materials. Another significant research branch,
conducted mainly by Dansereau and colleagues using knowledge maps, has inves-
tigated the cognitive effects of studying or communicating with preconstructed
maps. This research uses maps as advance organizers, collaboration tools, and
stand-alone information sources for individual learning.
In recent years, scholars have suggested that concept mapping may be especially
effective in interactive software environments (Cafias et al., 2003; Novak, 1998,
2002). Software can reduce many of the mechanical obstacles to editing complex
maps, provide feedback on the correctness of student-constructed maps (Chang,
Sung, & Chen, 2002), and present maps in learner-controlled, animated formats that
guide learners through visually complex structures (Nesbit & Adesope, 2005).
Meta-Analyses of Graphic Organizer and Concept Map Research
Because graphic organizers and concept maps have some shared features and
are used in similar ways, graphic organizer research is relevant to analyzing the
effects of concept maps. In a meta-analysis of graphic organizer research, Moore
and Readence (1984) found that initiating learning activities with graphic orga-
nizers led to small, positive effects on comprehension; their use as activity-closing
summaries produced somewhat larger effects. Moore and Readence cautiously
attributed this difference to greater "student involvement" (p. 15) in activity-closing
uses. Although Moore and Readence did not obtain separate effect sizes for pre-
constructed organizers and student-constructed organizers, activity summarizing
more often used student-constructed organizers.
Horton et al. (1993) conducted a meta-analysis of 18 classroom-based concept
map studies. They reported (over 14 studies) that concept mapping by students
raised posttest achievement scores by a mean of .42 standard deviations. The mean
effect size for 3 studies using teacher-prepared maps was .59. Concept mapping by
415


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
.0
U)
ýL
E~) OŽ
C5
110
A-*
4I) -P
416


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Learning With Concept and Knowledge Maps
students in groups (2 studies) produced a mean effect size of .88. Four studies that
measured attitudinal effects demonstrated a mean effect size of 1.57. Five of the
studies analyzed by Horton et al. used comparison treatments in which no valid
instruction was provided; the remainder provided some form of "conventional or
didactic type of instruction" (p. 104) as a comparison treatment.
Hypothesized Cognitive and Self-Regulatory Effects
Several explanations have been advanced to account for the beneficial effects of
concept maps. Some explanations point to unique, intrinsic properties of the concept
map medium. Others point to properties that concept maps share with other summary
formats, such as outlines and lists. Building on these explanations, theorists have also
proposed interactions between the properties of concept maps and individual differ-
ences among learners. In this section we review the theoretical background of the
research questions that guided the meta-analysis.
Dual Coding and Conjoint Retention
Viewing or constructing concept maps in conjunction with semantically equiv-
alent text or spoken presentations may facilitate cognitive representation of the
information in both verbal and visuospatial memory. According to Paivio's dual
coding theory (Paivio, 1986), verbal knowledge and mental images reside in sep-
arate but potentially interlinked memory codes. Links between verbal and visu-
ospatial codes provide additional retrieval paths for both types of information.
Furthermore, because verbal and visuospatial memories draw from different cog-
nitive resources, simultaneous verbal and visuospatial processing can be efficiently
performed (Baddeley, 1992). Dual coding theory has been used to explain enhanced
retention and transfer when learners study pictures accompanied by speech or text
(Mayer, 2001). Images can, however, be cognitively generated from verbal infor-
mation (Denis & Cocude, 1992). Therefore, dual coding does not necessarily require
both pictorial and verbal input; and, in some situations, presenting only verbal infor-
mation may be as effective as presenting both forms.
Theories of how students learn from geographic maps may help us to under-
stand the effects of concept maps. It is well established that introducing a geographic
map as an adjunct to verbal information presented as text (or speech) increases recall
of information referenced in both the map and the verbal presentations (Diana
& Webb, 1997; Griffin & Robinson, 2005; Stock et al., 1995). Of particular inter-
est, however, is whether geographic maps are more effective as supplementary
materials than lists and other text formats and, if so, what specific characteristics
and usages of the maps contribute to the enhancement. One replicated finding is
that recall of facts about places described in a speech passage is greater when pre-
sentation of the passage is preceded by a relevant geographic map rather than a ver-
bal description of the map (Stock et al., 1995; Winn, 1991). Kulhavy's conjoint
retention theory, an extension of dual coding theory, postulates that visuospatial
memory encodes local features, such as landmarks, mimetic icons, and symbols,
as well as structural information representing the spatial configuration of features,
the relative distances between features,and the positions of features relative to the
map boundary (Verdi & Kulhavy, 2002). According to conjoint retention theory,
feature information and structural information both facilitate the coding and later
recall of accompanying texts. Visual features aid later recall if they are visually
417


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
distinct and drawn in such a way that they activate prior knowledge about the rep-
resented place (e.g., are mimetic). Structural knowledge establishes a spatial frame
that references visual features and verbal knowledge to enable efficient, spatially
indexed memory searches. Recent research (Griffin & Robinson, 2000, 2005) casts
doubt on the role of structural information in aiding recall of text information and
suggests that the benefits of presenting geographic maps might be entirely attrib-
utable to the knowledge-activating properties of localized features. In this view,
consistent with dual coding theory but not with conjoint retention theory, supple-
mentary material consisting of a list of labeled icons representing local features
would be just as effective as a map showing the geographic distribution of the
labeled icons.
Dual coding theory suggests that concept maps can facilitate learning if they
incorporate labeled nodes drawn as distinct, mimetic icons-pictures that help the
leamer to retrieve prior knowledge about the concept and code the concept as an
image. Although concept mapping software is available that allows map authors
to represent each node by a labeled image, none of the research reviewed in this
meta-analysis used maps incorporating mimetic icons. Conjoint retention theory,
admittedly applied outside the domain for which it was conceived, suggests that
concept maps may facilitate learning by enabling the learner to code a spatial frame
for indexing and efficiently retrieving concepts.
Verbal Coding
Standing as a distinct alternative to dual coding and conjoint retention is the
notion that the graphical conventions of concept maps are coded more like texts
than pictures. In this view, any visuospatial coding of the map image in long-term
memory is less important than the processes by which the map image facilitates
verbal coding. There are several plausible means by which concept maps might be
more effective than text in facilitating verbal coding.
In maps, a concept is represented by a single node regardless of how many rela-
tionships it has with other concepts. That is, maps visually integrate propositions
dealing with the same concept. In contrast, a concept may be represented at sev-
eral places scattered throughout a text passage, and it may be represented by dif-
ferent words. Larkin and Simon (1987) described how diagrams, in comparison
with text, can offer more efficient support to comprehension and problem solving.
Maps may lower the cognitive load needed to add new associations to those already
linked with previously encountered concepts by allowing a more efficient visual
search than text passages, a more efficient search of long-term memory, or both.
Maps may facilitate verbal coding by co-locating concepts that have similar
meanings or that are subsumed by the same, higher-order concept, thus signaling
the information's macrostructure. Placement of nodes may reduce cognitive load
by reducing the visual or memory search required to distinguish or associate sim-
ilar concepts. Winn (1991) reviewed research suggesting that pre-attentive visual
processing of diagrams, such as visual chunking of collocated objects, lends effi-
ciencies that cannot be obtained from text. The pre-attentive visual processes draw
from cognitive resources that do not interfere with those required for attentional
processing. A similar advantage may be obtained when concept maps use distinc-
tive shapes and colors for nodes representing different types of concepts. Indeed,
there is evidence that learning is enhanced by studying maps in which meaning is
418


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Learning With Concept and Knowledge-Maps
signaled by node proximity, shape, and color (Wallace, West, Ware, & Dansereau,
1998; Wiegmann, Dansereau, & McCagg, 1992).
Learning Strategies
Weinstein and Mayer (1986) described the use of conceptmaps (they called it
"networking") as an organizational strategy for complex learning tasks such as com-
prehending text. Students who have learned to read or construct concept maps may
be better able to identify the internal connections among concepts presented in text.
The act of translating information from a text format to,a node-link format may
require that learners process meaning more deeply than they normally do when read-
ing text or listening to a lecture. According to this view, learners benefit from
receiving information in a text format and converting it to a map format, or vice
versa. For example, as learners construct a map from a text passage, there may be
advantages in having them group nodes spatially according to semantic similarity,
because in doing so they must make decisions about information structure that is
latent in the text. In constructing a hierarchical concept map, learners must judge
the relative inclusivity or specificity of concepts, a process that demands cognitive
engagement (Novak & Gowin, 1984). Because it is often possible to conver between
map and text with a fairly simple and automatic procedure, greater benefit may
accrue if the learner is required to translate from the relationship terms found in text
passages to a restricted, standardized vocabulary for node labels, such as those used
in knowledge maps (Holley & Dansereau, 1984).
Concept maps may enhance learning when they are used to summarize'infor-
mation. There is a great deal of evidence that creating or studying summaries boosts
recall of summarized ideas (Foos, 1995). Compared with prose-form summaries,
concept maps may be reviewed more quickly, allowing research participants to
complete more passes through the presented information in a fixed amount of time.
In this respect concept maps may be similar to other concise summary formats such
as lists and indented outlines (O'Donnell, Dansereau, & Hall, 2002). If concept
maps are inherently biased toward the representation of summary information, it
may be that they are particularly good for acquiring main ideas, but poor for acquir-
ing detailed, nuance-laden knowledge.
Unlike prose, concept maps have no conventional reading order and may thereby
encourage a range of deep learning strategies that depart from the surface strategy
of repeated reading. For example, when deciding which node to,process first, a
student may decide to select the most important or most central concept. The act
of judging concept importance requires deeper processing than the student'might
normally exercise when reading text (Novak & Gowin, 1984). In general, process-
ing the meaning of concept maps may be a less routinized cognitive activity than
reading text passages, and therefore more likely to trigger metacognitive engage-
ment. Learning to construct or read concept maps may increase students' ability to
construct knowledge from information resources even when they are performing
tasks that do not involve concept maps (Chmielewski & Dansereau, 1998). It may
be that students who have worked with-concept maps are more likely to explicitly
identify concepts found in text, and the relations among them.
Learning to work with concept maps may help students to parse the meaning
of text and other information sources. Unlike outlines, lists, and other graphical
organizers, concept maps are built from concept-relationship-concept triplets that
419


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
constitute complete propositions. Therefore, to construct concept maps from a text,
students must more thoroughly and precisely extract the text's meaning.
Individual Differences
There is some evidence that low-ability students, perhaps specifically those
with low verbal ability, obtain greater benefit from instructional diagrams than
do high-ability learners (Holliday, Brunner, & Donais, 1977; Moyer, Sowder,
Threadgill-Sowder, & Moyer, 1984; Stensvold & Wilson, 1990). Several theorists
(O'Donnell, Dansereau, & Hall, 2002; Patterson, Dansereau, & Wiegmann, 1993;
Lambiotte & Dansereau, 1992) have hypothesized that students with low verbal
ability can more easily understand and construct concept maps than they can
decipher and write scholarly text, and that these students may benefit more from
the use of concept maps than students with high verbal ability. The format of con-
cept maps, specifically the use of brief labels and simple node-link-node syntax to
represent propositions, may be more easily comprehended and constructed by
learners who have lower verbal ability. Compared with the language presented in
textbooks, concept maps offer a relatively regular and simple syntax. Maps may
also be easier to comprehend for learners studying in a second language (Amer,
1994).
Lambiotte and Dansereau (1992) proposed that students with low prior knowl-
edge benefit more from concept maps than those with high prior knowledge. Citing
Mayer's assimilation theory (Mayer, 1979), they hypothesized that the specific
macrostructure signaled by a map might guide the knowledge construction of less
knowledgeable students but conflict with the cognitive structures already estab-
lished in more knowledgeable students.
Collaborative and Cooperative Learning
Preconstructed concept maps have been used in a variety of small group learn-
ing activities such as scripted cooperation (Rewey, Dansereau, Dees, Skaggs, &
Pitre, 1992) and peer teaching (Patterson, Dansereau, & Wiegmann, 1993). Analy-
ses of student interactions during collaborative concept mapping in science edu-
cation have demonstrated that this activity can sustain meaningful discourse and
co-construction of key concepts (Roth & Roychoudhury, 1993, 1994; Stoyanova
& Kommers, 2002; van Boxtel, van der Linden, Roelofs, & Erkens, 2002). For
example, van Boxtel et al. found that secondary science students who constructed
maps in dyads uttered approximately three on-topic propositions per minute, with
similar levels of participation from both members of the dyad.
Concept maps seem to suit collaborative and cooperative learning because, like
lists and outlines, they make economical use of text and can be written with letters
that are large enough to be viewed by a small group. When drawn on large paper
sheets or whiteboards, concept maps can often be extended with less need for reor-
ganization and erasure than lists and outlines. Because semantic dependencies are
more explicitly represented in concept maps than in text formats, they may be more
amenable to concurrent editing in which different group members simultaneously
modify the product. As noted by van Boxtel et al. (2002), concept mapping does
not require detailed writing activities that can take time away from discussion of
substantive concepts.
420


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Research Questions
The goal of the meta-analysis was to review all experimental and quasi-
experimental studies on the learning effects of concepts maps that met specific
methodological criteria. A reexamination of this research base is due because
many concept map studies have appeared since 1993, the year in which the meta-
analysis by Horton et al. was published. About half the studies coded in the pre-
sent meta-analysis were published during or after 1993. Unlike Horton et al., we
included laboratory studies in which the learning activities were not part of a formal
course of study or in which the learning outcomes were not assessed for acade-
mic credit. By expanding the scope to include laboratory research, we added many
experiments that had participants study maps rather than construct them.
Recognizing the considerable diversity in the concept map research base, and
the plurality of the research questions that it addresses, our goal was to estimate
the effects of specific approaches to using maps and to qualify those effects accord-
ing to the conditions under which they were investigated. Our initial intent was to
include and categorize any learning-related outcomes from this literature that could
be aggregated for meta-analytic treatment, potentially including knowledge com-
prehension, retention, and transfer, as well as changes in learning skills, motiva-
tion, and attitudes.
The meta-analysis addressed the following research questions:
"• What are the effects of learning activities in which learners construct or mod-
ify maps in comparison with other, nonmapping learning activities?
"* What are the effects of studying maps in comparison with studying other
materials such as text passages, outlines, and lists?
"* How do these effects vary when maps are used in different knowledge domains,
educational levels, and instructional designs?
"* How does the use of concept maps affect constructs such as central knowl-
edge, detailed knowledge, knowledge transfer, learning skills, and attitudes
toward learning?
"* What are the effects of using maps in cooperative and collaborative learning?
"* How do different levels of verbal ability and prior knowledge affect learning
from concept maps?
"* How are concept map effect sizes conditioned by methodological features of
the research?
Method
Study Selection Criteria
Following a preliminary examination of empirical studies and reviews, we formed
criteria that would capture research designed to assess the educational and learning
effects of concept maps. We included in the meta-analysis studies that (a) contrasted
the effects of map study, construction, or manipulation with the effects of other
learning activities; (b) measured cognitive or motivational outcomes such as
recall, problem-solving transfer, learning skills, interest, and attitude; (c) reported
sufficient data to allow an estimate of standardized mean difference effect size;
(d) assigned participants to groups prior to differing treatments; (e) randomly
assigned participants to groups, or used a pretest or other prior variable correlated
421


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
with outcome to control for preexisting differences among groups. Studies report-
ing a pretest effect size outside the range -. 40 < d < .40 were excluded from the
meta-analysis. When a study was reported in more than one source (e.g., dissertation
and journal article), the version published in a journal article was used for coding.
Reports available in languages other than English were considered. Specifically, two
studies written in Japanese (Minagawa, 1999; Takumi, 200 1) were translated into
English but were not coded because they did not meet criteria (a) and (b), above.
Implicit in the first criterion (a) is that sufficient information must have been
supplied about comparison treatments to ensure that they constituted legitimate and
reasonable learning activities. More generally, both comparison and experimental
treatments must have been designed to promote learning. Effect sizes were excluded
if the authors stated that one of the treatments was intentionally designed to be con-
fusing or difficult to learn from. For example, we excluded one finding from a study
by Blankenship and Dansereau (2000, p. 297) in which the treatment presented a
map intentionally designed to have "poor structural properties."
Search, Retrieval, and Selection of Studies
On May 4, 2005, we searched six databases using the query concept map* OR
knowledge map* OR node-link map *. The databases and number of studies returned
by each database (in parentheses) were ERIC (847), Web of Science (564), PsycINFO
empirical studies (396), PsycARTICLES (397), Academic Search Elite (281),
and Dissertation Abstracts (170). We searched titles and abstracts of presentations
at annual meetings of the American Educational Research Association and the
National Association for Research in Science Teaching held after 1990. Finally,
we searched the reference sections of a few comprehensive review papers (Cafias
et al., 2003; Horton et al., 1993; Novak, 1990a, 1990b; O'Donnell, Danserean, &
Hall, 2002).
In the selection phase, one researcher read the abstract or online text of each
study found in the search. If the abstract did not provide sufficient information to
exclude the study according to our selection criteria, the researcher scanned the
methods, procedure, and data collection parts of the paper to retain or exclude the
paper. Borderline cases were retained for full text inspection. For each thesis found
through the Dissertation Abstracts database, the researcher read the first 24 pages
to determine eligibility for inclusion. Studies identified as not meeting the selec-
tion criteria were eliminated, resulting in a list of 122 studies for which full text
copies were obtained.
Coding Study Characteristics and Effect Sizes
Two researchers independently read each study retained in the previous phase
to (a) eliminate those found not to meet the selection criteria, (b) select group com-
parisons consistent with the research questions of the meta-analysis, and (c) code
each comparison according to a predefined coding form and coding instructions.
The coding form consisted of 26 menu items and 38 brief comment items. The
items included source (e.g., journal or dissertation), grade level, participant gen-
der, setting and task, structure of adjunct materials, type of student interaction, con-
tent domain, country, how the map was used and designed, duration of study and
treatment, comparison treatment, participant attrition, control for pretreatment dif-
ferences (e.g., random assignment), and outcome construct.
422


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Learning With Concept and Knowledge Maps
The coders also rated treatment fidelity, that is, the thoroughness with which the
treatment conditions were applied and monitored. This included consideration of
whether participants were properly trained in the treatment activities, and to what
extent their engagement in learning activities was monitored. For example, in a con-
cept mapping study, a high treatment fidelity rating could be assigned if researchers
observed the participants while they were constructing maps. A medium rating
could be assigned if mapping activities were not observed but the maps were later
assessed by the researchers. A low rating could be assigned if participants were
asked to construct maps but there was no monitoring or assessment.
Effect Size Extraction
One important principle of meta-analysis is to avoid entering effect sizes that
are statistically dependent (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001). For example, if a study has
one control group and two treatment groups exposed to different types of maps,
it is inappropriate to enter the two map-versus-control findings as different effect
sizes because they share the same control group. Doing so would inflate the over-
all weight attributed to the study by counting the control group twice. We devised
a coding scheme that would allow us to preserve interesting but statistically depen-
dent comparisons from the same study. By using the coding scheme we avoided
inappropriately combining statistically dependent comparisons in calculating aver-
age effect sizes, while still using them in separate analyses.
When repeated outcomes were reported (e.g., immediate and delayed achieve-
ment tests), only the later outcome was used. When data from multiple experi-
mental or comparison treatments were reported, and the distinctions among the
treatments did not address the research questions or could not be aligned with
differing treatments from other studies, the weighted average of the multiple
treatment groups was coded.
Using group means and standard deviations, a standardized mean difference
effect size (Cohen's d) was obtained for each finding:
X - (1)
SPooled
where Xe is the mean of the (experimental) group using concept maps, X, is the
mean of the comparison group, and Spooled is their pooled standard deviation.
Cohen's d.was then used to calculate Hedge's unbiased estimate of the standard-
ized mean difference effect size (Hedges & Olkin, 1985, p. 81):
g=( 4-93 .)d, (2)
where Nis the total number of participants in the experimental and comparison
groups. The inverse variance weight, important for aggregating effect sizes, was
coded for each finding as
2 ne n, (n , + n , (3)
2(n, + n,)' +
423


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
where ne is the sample size of the experimental group and n, is the sample size of
the comparison group (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001).
As recommended by Lipsey and Wilson, the coders estimated their confidence
in the data with which the effect size was calculated. The effect size confidence was
rated as low, medium, or high depending on reliability of the posttest scores, pretest
effect sizes, and whether sufficient data were available for an accurate calculation.
Data Analysis
So that the contribution of a finding would be commensurate with its sample
size, weighted mean effect sizes were calculated as
- = Y_( wiESi)
E Wi (4)
where ESI is Hedge's unbiased estimate (g) of the ith effect size, and wi is the
inverse variance weight coded for ESj (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001). The standard error
of the mean was calculated as
SEjs= (5)
To determine statistical significance, a 95% confidence interval was constructed
around each weighted mean effect size. The lower limit (ESD and upper limit (ESu)
of the confidence interval were calculated as
ESL = ES- 1.96(SE%),
ESu = ES+ 1.96 (SE%), (6)
where TS is the mean effect size, 1.96 is the critical value for the z-distribution
(ca = .05), and SEs is the standard error of the mean effect size. When the lower
limit of a confidence interval was greater than zero, the mean effect size was inter-
preted as indicating a statistically detectable result favoring the use of concept maps.
One of the assumptions of the significance test is that all findings aggregated
into a weighted mean.effect size share the same population effect size and that the
observed dispersion of effect sizes around the mean results only from the random
sampling of participants from the population, that is, sampling error. This assump-
tion was tested by the homogeneity of variance statistic
When all k effect sizes comprising a mean effect size are derived from the same pop-
ulation effect size, Q has a chi-square distribution with k - 1 degrees of freedom.
When Q exceeded the critical value of the chi-square distribution (p < .05), the mean
effect size was judged to be significantly heterogeneous (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001).
424


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Results
Out of the 122 studies retained in the initial selection phase, 55 studies involv-
ing 5,818 participants were found to meet the specified selection criteria and were
coded. The most frequent reason for rejecting studies was failure to control for prior
differences among treatment groups. The mean intercoder agreement was 96.2%.
Six admitted studies, listed in Table 1, measured self-report outcomes that we
categorized as affect (anxiety, frustration, satisfaction), self-efficacy, motivation,
and perceived use of learning strategies. As in other sections of this report, the signs
of effect sizes were switched so that beneficial effects of using maps (e.g., anxiety
reduction) would be indicated by positive values. The studies that measured self-
report outcomes investigated disparate uses of concept maps. Considering the
small number of these studies and the diverse set of treatments and outcome con-
structs, we decided not to obtain mean effect sizes for self-report outcomes. But
we note that using concept maps was associated with positive effect sizes in all
cases where self-reports were measured. The remainder of the results section deals
with studies reporting performance outcomes.
Appendix A (page 441) shows a summary of the 96 effect sizes extracted for
performance outcomes prior to resolving statistical dependencies. For some studies,
more than one effect size was extracted. Within a study, statistically dependent and
independent findings were differentiated according to whether they used separate
subsamples, multiple outcome constructs for the same participants, or multiple
TABLE 1
Effect sizes for self-reports of affect, self-efficacy, motivation, and use of learning strategies
Study, treatments, sample size, and outcome construct Effect size (g)
Bahr & Dansereau (2001), studying bilingual maps versus lists, N= 64
Ease of learning .48
Satisfaction with presentation format .46
Motivation and concentration .26
Confidence in future performance .44
Chularut & DeBacker (2004), mapping versus teacher-led
discussions, N= 79
Use of self-monitoring strategies 4.34*
Use of knowledge acquisition strategies 3.48*
English-as-a-second-language self-efficacy .98*
Czerniak & Haney (1998), cooperative mapping versus lecture, N= 118
Anxiety toward teaching and learning (sign reversed) .41,
Jegede & Alaiyemola (1990), mapping versus lectures, N= 51
Anxiety (sign reversed) 1.11*
Reynolds & Dansereau (1990), studying hypermaps versus
hypertext, N = 38
Satisfaction .87*
Frustration and confusion (sign reversed) .80*
Reynolds et al. (1991), studying hypermaps versus hypertext, N= 38
Satisfaction .47
Frustration and confusion (sign reversed) .62
*p <. 05.
425


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
treatment groups compared with a single control group. Effect sizes in the same
study obtained from wholly separate participant subsamples were regarded as sta-
tistically independent (Lipsey & Wilson, p. 112). Effect sizes obtained from over-
lapping subsamples (e.g., same participants but different outcome measures) were
regarded as statistically dependent.
Two admitted studies measured knowledge of relationships between concepts
while also assessing, in the same participants, broader conceptual knowledge pre-
sented by the treatment. For knowledge of concept relationships, Schmid and Telaro
(1990) found an effect size of g =.89, and Lehman, Carter, and Kahle (1985) found
an effect size of g = .28. Both effect sizes were excluded from further analysis
because they were not statistically independent of the effect sizes reported for
broader conceptual knowledge outcomes. The remaining outcome constructs were
coded as retention, transfer, mixed retention and transfer, and learning skills.
To generate a distribution of statistically independent effect sizes, a single effect
size was obtained for each set of statistically dependent effect sizes by calculating
a weighted average over different outcome constructs and treatment groups. One
study with an effect size of g = 5.94 (Guastello, Beasley, & Sinatra, 2000) was
judged to be an outlier (z = +6.4, p < .001). Because a reexamination of the study
could not attribute the exceptional effect size to methodological flaws or artifacts
and because the study observed participants who had characteristics apparently
similar to other samples in this analysis, the effect size was not deleted but, rather,
was adjusted downward to a value (g = +2.2) slightly greater than the next-largest
effect size, as recommended by Tabachnick and Fidell (2001).
Effects of Constructing and Studying Concept Maps
Participants constructed or modified maps in 25 studies, from which were
derived 27 statistically independent effect sizes. Participants studied concept maps
in 30 studies, from which were derived 40 statistically independent effect sizes.
Students in the comparison treatment groups participated in group discussions,
attended lectures, or worked with outlines, lists, or text passages.
Table 2 shows the weighted mean of all statistically independent effect sizes,
split according to whether maps were constructed or studied, and the geographical
location of the research. The table includes the number of participants (N) in each
category, the number of findings (k), the weighted mean effect size (M) and its stan-
dard error (SE), the 95% confidence interval around the mean, and the results of a
test of homogeneity (Q) with its associated degrees of freedom (df). The effects of
concept maps were statistically detectable in all categories except for the averaged
results of two studies conducted in Taiwan, in which students constructed maps.
One of the two Taiwanese studies (Chang, Sung, & Chen, 2002), coded as having
high treatment fidelity and high effect size confidence, reported statistically signif-
icant benefits from concept mapping activities. The other Taiwanese study (Chang,
1994), coded as having low treatment fidelity and medium effect size confidence,
reported no significant difference.
Homogeneity was rejected for all effect size means in Table 2, indicating that
they represent widely varying individual effect sizes. Heterogeneity was notice-
ably higher across studies in which maps were constructed rather than presented,
perhaps reflecting the greater diversity of treatments and lower experimental con-
trol in concept mapping research.
426


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
TABLE 2
Weighted mean effect sizes for concept maps constructed and studied by geographical location
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect size interval of effect size
Category N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
All 5,818 67 .604* .028 .550 .658 472.729* 66
Maps constructed 3,160 27 .819* .039 .744 .895 342.212* 26
U.S. and Canada 1,539 18 .467* .053 .363 .571 123.769* 17
Africa 1,388 7 1.446* .061 1.326 1.566 30.276* 6
Taiwan 233 2 -. 003 .138 -. 274 .268 4.000* 1
Maps studied 2,658 40 .373* .040 .294 .451 65.882* 39
U.S. and Canada 2,358 37 .369* .042 .287 .452 55.557* 36
Other 300 3 .401* .128 .149 .653 10.269* 2
*p <. 0 5 .
The mean effect size for concept mapping studies conducted in Africa (Nigeria
and Egypt) was much higher than for other locations. All but one of the African
studies were conducted in Nigeria by P. A. Okebukola and his colleagues. Accord-
ing to Okebukola (personal communication, July 11, 2004), concept mapping offers
special benefits to Nigerian students when compared with conventional Nigerian
teaching methods that rely on intensive lecturing to large classes (Edukugho, 2005).
Although English was the language of instruction in all of the African studies, it
was a second or third language for most of the participants. Nigerian and Egyptian
participants may have found the syntactic structure of concept maps easier to parse
than the English lectures. Faced with rather large differences in effect size across
geographical locations for the concept mapping studies, we decided to restrict our
focus for the remainder of the analysis to those conducted in the United States and
Canada. All research in which participants studied maps was retained because there
was no evidence that the mean effect sizes for that research differed substantially
according to geographic location.
Educational Level, Setting, Subject, Duration, Adjunct Materials, and Map Type
Table 3 shows weighted mean effect sizes for concept mapping studies split
by educational level, class setting, subject (knowledge domain), and study dura-
tion. There were no laboratory studies in which participants constructed concept
maps. In all but three of the findings reported in Table 3, students performed the
learning activity (constructed maps or did a comparison learning activity) entirely
in a classroom under the supervision of an instructor. Unlike the research in
which maps were studied, research in which maps were constructed inconsis-
tently reported treatment duration. As a proxy for variation in treatment duration,
Table 3 presents an approximate median split on study duration, which was reported
in all but two findings.
All categories listed in Table 3 show statistically detectable mean effect sizes,
except studies that did not report study duration. For most categories, however, the
effect size distributions were significantly heterogeneous, indicating that the vari-
ability among effect sizes was greater than that expected from sampling error. In
427


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
TABLE 3
Weighted mean effect sizes for constructing concept maps under various conditions
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect size interval of effect size
Condition N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
Educational level
Intermediate 346 4 .905* .118 .673 1.137 45.433* 3
(Grades 4 to 8)
Secondary 792 7 .165* .072 .024 .306 3.118 6
(Grades 9 to 12)
Postsecondary 401 7 .773* .106 .565 .981 35.601* 6
Setting
Entirely in class 1,303 15 .380* .057 .268 .491 61.181* 14
Not entirely in class 236 3 1.039* .146 .753 1.325 44.865* 2
Subject
Physical science 582 6 .283* .085 .117 .450 2.740 5
General science, 818 9 .522* .073 .379 .665 73.064* 8
biology, and
statistics
Humanities, law, 139 3 1.265* .193 .886 1.643 19.780* 2
and social studies
Study duration
5 weeks 652 9 .701* .085 .536 .867 92.700* 8
>5 weeks 601 7 .363* .083 .199 .526 12.114 6
Unknown 286 2 .215 .119 -.019 .449 5.268* 1
*p <. 05 .
such cases, we interpret variation across categories as suggesting but not confirm-
ing theoretical interpretation. For instance, the mean effect sizes and confidence
intervals across the subject categories suggest that concept mapping offers greater
benefit in subject areas that are more saturated with verbal knowledge. However,
the certainty of this interpretation is limited by significant heterogeneity and the
small number of findings in the humanities, law, and social studies category. In the
tables that follow, different ways of subdividing the data are presented to identify
the source of the excess variation among studies.
Table 4 shows mean effect sizes for studying concept maps split by educational
level, setting, subject, treatment duration, use of adjunct materials, and map type.
Almost all of these studies used undergraduate university students as participants.
Most of the investigations summarized in Table 4 were conducted in laboratory
settings; that is, they used learning activities that did not contribute toward perfor-
mance assessment in an academic program. An approximate median split was used
to divide studies into those with treatment durations less than or greater than 1 hour.
Almost all of the categories identified in Table 4 had statistically detectable mean
effect sizes, but most were also significantly heterogeneous.
Most studies in Table 4 used text in adjunct or source materials for both exper-
imental and treatment groups. For example, Wachter (1993) had an experimental
428


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
TABLE 4
Weighted mean effect sizes for studying concept maps under various conditions
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect size interval of effect size
Condition N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
Educational level
Intermediate 162 2 .516* .160 .203 .829 .404 -1
(Grades 4 to 8)
Postsecondary 2,496 38 .363* .041 .282 .444 64.617* 37
Setting
Laboratory 1,967 32 .364* .046 .274 .455 53.343* 31
Classroom 611 7 .366* .085 .200. .532 11.328 6
Unknown 80 1 .620
Subject
Physical science 82 1 .417
General science, 2,135 32 .340* .045 .253 .427 58.915* 31
biology, and
statistics
Humanities, 441 7 .528* .100 .332 .724 3.969 6
law, and
social studies
Treatment duration
60 min 1,471 21 .363* .054 .257 .469 28.755 20
>60 min 1,187 19 .384* .059 .268 .500 37.050* 18
Adjunct materials
Yes 1,414 24 .315* .055 .207 .424 38.761* 23
No 1,244 16 .435* .058 .322 .549 24.882 15
Map type
Static 2,205 32 .393* .044 .308 .479 50.443* 31
Animated 154 2 .739* .172 .402 1.076 .032 1
Hyýerlinked 299 6 .017 .124 -. 225 .259 2.371 5
*p <. 0 5.
group study a map before studying a text passage and had the comparison group
immediately begin to study the text passage. A large minority of studies had learn-
ers in the experimental group study only a concept map and learners in the com-
parison group study only a nonmap information source. The moderate mean effect
size in this latter category indicates that, in at least some situations, concepts maps
can work effectively as stand-alone information sources.
Although the majority of the studies in Table 4 used static concept maps presented
on paper, a few presented animated maps or hyperlinked maps that participants could
use to access hypertext. The two studies that compared presentation of animated
maps with animated text (Blankenship & Dansereau, 2000; Nesbit & Adesope, 2005)
obtained substantial effect sizes favoring animated concept maps. Notably, however,
the hypertext studies indicated no significant advantage for hyperlinked maps in
comparison with hyperlinked outlines and other navigational devices.
429


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
Outcome Constructs and Test Types
Appendix B (page 447) shows the outcome constructs measured by the studies.
The studies were split according to outcome construct (retention, transfer, mixed
retention and transfer) and test format (free recall, objective items, short answer
items, mixed item types). Most research in which learners studied maps used reten-
tion measures, typically a free recal test. In contrast, the classroom-based research,
in which learners constructed maps, tended to use achievement measures, typically
a multiple-choice test that mixed retention items with near transfer items. Mean
effect sizes were statistically detectable in all categories, but most were signifi-
cantly heterogeneous.
Methodological Quality
Appendix C (page 448) shows how effect sizes varied with the methodological
quality of the research and whether it was published in ajournal. The studies were
split according to the coders' confidence in the calculated effect size, the coders'
rating of treatment fidelity, whether the study randomly assigned participants to
treatments, and whether the study appeared in a journal or dissertation. Mean
effect sizes were statistically detectable in all categories. Among classroom stud-
ies in which students constructed or modified maps, low or medium coder confi-
dence in the effect size was associated with low mean effect size, and high coder
confidence in the effect size was associated with high mean effect size. In the same
studies, random assignment of participants to treatment conditions was associated
with a high mean effect size, and nonrandom assignment was associated with a
lower mean effect size. The investigations in which maps were studied does not
show a similar pattern, probably because they were mainly better-controlled labo-
ratory studies with more consistent methodological quality.
Individual, Group, and Cooperative Settings
Table 5 shows mean effect sizes for learning with concept maps in individual,
group, and cooperative settings. For the studies in which maps were constructed, it
TABLE5
Weighted mean effect sizes for types of interpersonal interaction
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect size interval of effect size
Category N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
Maps constructed
Individual 460 5 .119 .094 -.065 .302 .879 4
Mixed group 647 10 .955* .086 .787 1.123 68.495* 9
and individual
Not applicable 432 3 .215 .098 .023 .407 1.719 2
or unknown
Maps studied
Individual 2,298 32 .402* .043 .318 .487 59.045* 31
'Cooperative (dyads) 360 -8 .192 .106 -. 016 .401 3.505 7
*p <. 0 5 .
430


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Learning With Concept and Knowledge Maps
was necessary to establish a category called mixed group and individual, in which
there was a combination ofgroup and individual learning with concept maps. These
studies, which showed a large and significant mean effect size, often involved stu-
dents individually constructing maps and then discussing them in a whole-class
activity. The category not applicable or unknown included studies that either did
not report sufficient data to determine social interactions during learning, or used
group learning for the mapping group and individual learning for the control group.
It would be misleading to identify studies in the mixed group and individual learn-
ing category as assessing the effectiveness of collaborative or cooperative concept
mapping, because they often used relatively large class groups in which there was
likely little or no contribution from many of the students, and the group interactions
often consisted of reviewing maps rather than constructing them.
Research in which materials were studied in individual learning settings pro-
duced a statistically detectable mean effect size favoring the use of concept maps.
In contrast, there was a nonsignificant mean effect size from studies in which pre-
constructed materials were used in cooperative tasks. The tasks used in the latter
studies were all structured as dyadic, scripted cooperation activities.
The large mean effect size found for the mixed group and individual studies
may have more to do with the comparison treatments used in these studies than the
type of interpersonal interaction. As we discuss in the following section, in studies
that use lectures or discussions as comparison treatments, the relatively greater
engagement provided by the concept-mapping activity may be the active ingredi-
ent that produces large, positive effects.
Despite the nonsignificant mean effect size for the dyadic cooperation studies, it
is too soon to conclude that concept maps are no better than other formats for use
as communication aids in cooperative learning. We believe that the potential advan-
tages of concept maps in cooperative learning are sensitive to both the nature of the
task and the training of participants in cooperative methods. Tasks that require rapid
communication of complex, non-hierarchically structured information are more
likely to benefit from the conceptually integrated propositions represented in the
concept map format. Also, students who do not have strategies for cooperative prob-
lem solving with maps may be unable to exploit their advantages. For example, in
one of the studies we reviewed (Patterson, Dansereau, & Newbern, 1992), dyads
learning about the interrelated physiological effects of alcohol obtained greater ben-
efit from concepts maps when they were provided with a strategy for using them in
cooperative learning (g = .65) than when no strategy was provided (g = .29).
Comparison Treatments
Effect sizes are likely to vary according to the type of comparison or control
treatment. Table 6 shows that among the map construction findings, 10 were from
studies that used lectures or whole-class discussions as comparison activities, and
7 were from studies that had students write text or outlines. In contrast, research
that presented preconstructed maps had participants study text, outlines, or lists
as a comparison activity. Statistically detectable benefits were demonstrated for
studying maps rather than outlines or lists, and for constructing maps rather than
reading text, attending lectures, or attending class discussions. Concept mapping
appears to compare very favorably with teaching methods in which learners have dif-
fuse responsibility for task completion (e.g., whole-class discussion), but it shows
431


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
TABLE 6
Weighted mean effect sizes for comparison treatments
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect size interval of effect size
Category N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
Maps constructed
Construct text 686 7 .194* .077 .042 .345 2.916 6
or outline
Lecture or 766 10 .742* .077 .591 .894 95.665* 9
discussion
Experiment 87 1 .45
(Pankratius, 1987)
Maps studied
Study text 2,027 29 .388* .046 .298 .478 53.360* 28
Study outline 561 10 .278* .086 .109 .447 9.597 9
or list
Lecture 70 1 .684
(Cliburn, 1986)
*p <. 05 .
only a small advantage over other constructive tasks, such as individual note-
taking or summarizing. As an effect size drops below .2 standard deviations, one
may be justified in questioning its pedagogical significance and whether it might
be attributed solely to experimenter bias.
The elevated effect size in studies that used lecture or discussion as the com-
parison treatment is important in interpreting the results of this meta-analysis
because it suggests that variation in the constructive quality of the comparison task
may underlie much of the effect size variation observed across other categories. In
particular, there is a substantial overlap between studies that used lecture or dis-
cussion as a comparison treatment and those in which students did concept map-
ping in mixed group and individual modes. Of the 10 studies that used mixed group
and individual concept mapping as an experimental treatment, 8 used lecture or
discussion as a comparison activity. We conjecture that many of the elevated effect
sizes generated by these studies are due to lower effectiveness of the comparison
treatment rather than to any particular benefit of mixed group and individual con-
cept mapping.
Individual Differences
We were unable to isolate theoretically relevant individual difference vari-
ables from the studies in which maps were constructed. However, there were a few
studies that presented maps to students who were identified as relatively low or
high in prior knowledge or verbal ability. Only relative, nonstandardized assess-
ments of these individual difference variables were reported. In each of these inves-
tigations, students were categorized using a median split on tests of prior knowledge
or verbal ability. Table 7 shows a statistically detectable mean effect size when
maps were presented to students who had relatively low ability (either verbal abil-
432


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
TABLE 7
Weighted mean effect sizes for high- and low-ability students studying concept maps
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect size interval of effect size
Student-ability N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
Domain ability
or verbal ability
High ability 186 5 -. 133 .150 -.427 .161 2.293 4
Low ability 188 5 .404* .150 .110 .698 .499 4
Domain ability
High domain 100 3 .034 .205 -. 367 .436 .772 2
ability
Low domain 93 3 .369 .215 -. 052 .791 .415 2
ability
Verbal ability
High verbal 86 2 -. 327 .220 -.759 .105 .079 1
ability
Low verbal 95 2 .436* .210 .026 .848 .041 1
ability
*p <. 0 5 .
ity or knowledge). When examined separately, only the effect for l1w verbal abil-
ity was statistically detectable. Because the statistical power of these comparisons
is low and the confidence intervals are wide, it cannot be concluded that maps do
not benefit higher-ability students.
Retaining Central'and Detail Ideas.
To examine how maps affected the recall of ideas at different levels of gen-
erality, we isolated studies that separately assessed central and detail knowledge.
Table 8 shows the results from six studies that presented semantically equivalent
text passages and maps and measured recall of central and detail ideas by the same
participants. There was a statistically detectable mean effect size for each of the
two types of knowledge outcomes, and the effect sizes for central ideas was larger.
Although derived from a relatively few studies, this is an important result because
it contradicts the hypothesis that concept maps are mere summary tools, achieving
TABLE 8
Weighted mean effect sizes for studying central and detail ideas
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect-size interval of effect size
Type of knowledge N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
Central ideas 457 6 .596* .098 .404 .787 26.898* 5
Detail ideas 457 6 .204* .096 .016 .392 27.349* 5
*p <. 05 .
433


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
gains in general knowledge only at the expense of losses in detailed knowledge. At
the same time, the greater benefit accorded to central ideas indicates that concept
maps may have an inherent bias toward summary.
Conclusion
The meta-analysis found that, in comparison with activities such as reading text
passages, attending lectures, and participating in class discussions, concept map-
ping activities are more effective for attaining knowledge retention and transfer.
Concept mapping was found to benefit learners across a broad range of educa-
tional levels, subject areas, and settings. Much of this benefit may be due to greater
learner engagement occasioned by concept mapping in comparison with reading
and listening, rather than the properties of the concept map as an information
medium. There is evidence that concept mapping is slightly more effective than
other constructive activities such as writing summaries and outlines. But the small
size of this effect raises doubts about its authenticity and pedagogical significance.
The advantages of concept mapping were more pronounced in better-designed
studies, particularly those that used random assignment of participants to treat-
ment groups. The significant heterogeneity associated with most mean effect
sizes for concept mapping indicates that the benefits discussed here are somewhat
unreliable and that carefully designed research is needed to better identify medi-
ating conditions.
Across educational levels, subject areas, and settings, it was found that studying
concept or knowledge maps is somewhat more effective for retaining knowledge
than studying text passages, lists, and outlines. This effect was especially strong in
two studies, that used animated maps but absent for hyperlinked maps. The bene-
fits of using preconstructed maps were evident in individual learning but not in
dyadic, cooperative learning. From a few studies, it appears that preconstructed
maps are particularly useful as a communication medium for students with lower
verbal proficiency and may offer little or no advantage to those 'with high verbal
proficiency. Studying maps rather than text passages assists in recall of both cen-
tral ideas and detail ideas, but the effect may be stronger for central ideas. There is
insufficient evidence to determine whether studying concept maps is particularly
efficacious for knowledge transfer and development of learning skills.
The result that studying concept maps is somewhat more effective than studying
lists and outlines contradicts the hypothesis that all summary formats confer equal
benefits, and is consistent with theories claiming that that concept maps lower extrin-
sic cognitive load by arranging nodes in two-dimensional space to represent related-
ness, consolidating all references to a concept in a single symbol, and explicitly
labeling links to identify relationships. The evidence that concept maps can be more
effective than text passages for conveying detailed information reinforces the notion
that concept maps have more to offer than the mere reduction of information.
These results help to identify gaps in the evidence and point to high-priority
areas for further research. To elucidate cognitive processes, there is an immediate
need for concept map research to assess learning outcomes beyond conventional
free recall and researcher-constructed achievement tests. Instead, investigations
should examine the processes by which students learn with concept maps and their
effects on higher-level learning goals such as problem-solving transfer, applica-
tion, and analysis (Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001); conceptual change (Novak,
434


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
Learning With Concept and Knowledge Maps
2002); and the development of learning skills (Chang, Sung, & Chen, 2002). To
explain how students learn from concept maps, research is needed that com-
pares the use of concept maps, graphic organizers (Katayama & Robinson,
2000), and outlines.
High-.quality research is needed on the use of concept maps in elementary and see-
ondary education, especially with students learning in second languages or who are
identified as havig reading and language difficulties. There is a lack of research on
pedagogical models for using concept maps in small group and whole-class settings.
More research is also needed on the effectiveness of concept mapping as a note-
taking and prewriting activity for developing reading and writing skills.
The evidence presented in this review should persuade teachers to make exten-
sive, well-planned-use of concept mapping activities and preconstructed concept
maps. We found no categories or conditions in which concept maps produced sig-
nificant negative effects, and, aside from the theoretical objection one might pose
that frequent use of concept maps could reduce practice in reading and writing text,
no potentially detrimental effects have been identified. Broadly, then, teachers and
instructional designers can be encouraged to adopt concept mapping as a learning
activity and to communicate ideas with preconstructed concept maps in a wide
range of educational settings.
Note
Supportfor this research was provided by a grant from the Social Sciences and Human-
ities Re6earch Council of Canada (Initiative for the New Economy 512-2003-1012,
Philip H. Winne).
Correspondence concerning this manuscript should be sent to John C. Nesbit (see
author contact information at end of article).
References
References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the meta-analysis.
*Abayomi, B. I. (1988). The effects of concept mapping and cognitive Style on sciefice
achievement (Doctoral dissertation, Georgia State University College of Education,
1988). Dissertation Abstracts Internatiohal, 49, 1420.
Alvermann, D., (1981). The compensatory effect of graphic organizers on descriptive
texts. Journal of Educational Research, 75, 44-48.
*Amer, A. A. (1994). The effect of knowledge-map and underlining training on the
reading comprehension of scientific texts. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 35-45.
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (Eds.). (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching
and assessing: A revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. New York:
Addison, Wesley, Longman.
Ausubel, D. P. (1968). Educational psychology. A cognitive view. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Baddeley, A. (1992). Is working memory working? The Fifteenth Bartlett lecture.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44A, 1-31.
*Bahr, G. S., & Dansereau, D. F.- (2001). Bilingual knowledge,maps (BiK-Maps) in
second-language vocabulary learning. Journal of Experimental Education, 70, 5-24.
*Bahr, G. S., & Dansereau, D. F. (2005). Bilingual knowledge maps (BiK-Maps) as a
presentation format: Delayed recall and training effects. Journal of Experimental
Education, 73, 101-118.
*Blankenship, J., & Dansereau, D. F. (2000). The effect of animated node-link displays
on information recall. Journal of Experimental Education, 68, 293-308.
435


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
*Bodolus, J. E. (1986). The use of a concept mapping strategy to facilitate meaningful
learning for ninth grade students in science (Doctoral dissertation, Temple Univer-
sity, 1986). Dissertation Abstracts International, 47, 3387.
Cafias, A. J., Coffey, J. W., Carnot, M. J., Feltovich, P., Hoffman, R. R., Feltovich, J.,
& Novak, J. D. (2003). A summary of literature pertaining to the use of concept map-
ping techniques and technologies for education and performance support (Report to
The Chief of Naval Education and Training). Pensacola, FL: Institute for Human and
Machine Cognition.
*Chang, K., Sung, Y., & Chen, I. (2002). The effect of concept mapping to enhance text
comprehension and summarization. Journal of Experimental Education, 71, 5-23.
*Chang, W. (1994). The effects of using concept mapping to supplement class notes
on the biology test scores of seventh-grade students in Taiwan, R.O.C. (Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Iowa, 1994). Dissertation Abstracts International, 55, 3800.
*Chnmielewski, T. L., & Dansereau, D. F. (1998). Enhancing the recall of text: Knowl-
edge mapping training promotes implicit transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology,
90,407-413.
*Chularut, P., & DeBacker, T. K. (2004). The influence of concept mapping on achieve-
ment, self-regulation, and self-efficacy in students of English as a second language.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29, 248-263.
*Cliburn, J. W., Jr. (1985). An Ausubelian approach to instruction: The use of con-
cept maps as advance organizers in a junior college anatomy and physiology class
(Doctoral dissertation, University of Southern Mississippi, 1985). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 47, 852.
*Czerniak, C. M., & Haney, J. J. (1998). The effect of collaborative concept mapping
on elementary preservice teachers' anxiety, efficacy, and achievement in physical
science. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 9, 303-320.
*Dees, S. (1989). An analysis of the strategic processing of knowledge maps as text sup-
plements and substitutes (Doctoral dissertation, Texas Christian University, 1989).
Dissertation Abstracts International, 50, 4252.
Denis, M., & Cocude, M. (1992). Structural properties of images constructed from
poorly or well-structured verbal descriptions. Memory & Cognition, 20, 497-506.
Diana, E. M., & Webb, J. M. (1997). Using geographic maps in classrooms: The con-
joint influence of individual differences and dual coding on learning facts, Learning
and Individual Differences, 9, 195-214.
Edukugho, E. (2005, June 16). Govt moves to cut pupil-teacher ratio. Odili News.
Retrieved June 27, 2005, from http://odili.net/news/source/2005/junI16/307.html
*Esiobu, G. 0., & Soyibo, K. (1995). Effects of concept and vee mappings under three
learning modes on students, cognitive achievement in ecology and genetics. Jour-
nal of Research in Science Teaching, 32, 971-995.
Estes, T. H., Mills, D. C., & Barron, R. F. (1969). Three methods of introducing
students to a reading-learning task in two content subjects. In H. L. Herber &
P. L. Sanders (Eds.), Research in reading in the content areas: First year report
(pp. 40-47). Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Foos, P. W. (1995). The effect of variations in text summarization opportunities on test
performance. Journal of Experimental Education, 63, 89-95.
Griffin, M. M., & Robinson, D. H. (2000). Role of mimeticism and spatiality in textual
recall. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25, 125-149.
Griffin, M. M., & Robinson, D. H. (2005). Does spatial or visual information in maps
facilitate text recall? Reconsidering the conjoint retention hypothesis. Educational
Technology Research and Development, 53, 23-36.
*Guastello, E. F., Beasley, M., & Sinatra, R. C. (2000). Concept mapping effects on
science content comprehension of low-achieving inner-city seventh graders. Remedial
and Special Education, 21, 356-365.
436


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
Learning With Concept and Knowledge Maps
*Hall, R. H., Dansereau, D. F., & Skaggs, L. P. (1992). Knowledge maps and the
presentation of related information domains. Journal of Experimental Education,
61, 5-18.
*Hall, R. H., & O'Donnell, A. M. (1996). Cognitive and affective outcomes of learn-
ing from knowledge maps. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 21, 94-101.
*Hall, R. H., & Sidio-Hall, M. A. (1994). The effect of color enhancement on knowl-
edge map processing. Journal of Experimental Education, 62, 209:-217.
Hawk, P. (1986). Using graphic organizers to increase achievement in middle school
life science. Science Education, 70, 81-87.
Hedges, L. V., & Olin, I. (1985). Statistical methodsfor meta-analysis. San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Holley, C., & Dansereau, D. (1984). Spatial learning strategies. New York: Acade-
mic Press.
Holliday, W. G., :Brunner, L. L., & Donais, E. L. (1977). Differential cognitive and
affective responses to flow diagrams in science. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 14, 129-138.
Horton, P. B., McConney, A. A., Gallo, M., Woods, A. L., Senn, G. J., & Hamelin, D.
(1993). An investigation of the effectiveness of concept mapping as an instructional
tool. Science Education, 77, 95-111.
Ives, B., & Hoy, C. (2003). Graphic organizers applied to higher-level secondary math-
ematics. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 18, 36-51.
*Jegede, 0. J., Alaiyemola, F. F., & Okebukola, P. A. (1990). The effect of concept
mapping on students' anxiety and achievement in biology. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 27, 951-960.
*Jolly, A. B. (1998). The effectiveness of learning with concept mapping on thescience
problem solving of sixth grade children (Doctoral dissertation, Indiana University of
Pennsylvania, 1998). Dissertation Abstracts International, 59, 3356.
Katayama, A. D., & Robinson, D. H. (2000). Getting students "partially" involved
in note-taking using graphic organizers. Journal of Experimental Education, 68,
119-133.
*Lambiotte, J. G., & Dansereau, D. F. (1992). Effects of knowledge maps and prior
knowledge on recall of science lecture content. Journal of Experimental Education,
60, 189-201.
Lambiotte, J. G., Dansereau, D. F., Cross, D. R., & Reynolds, S.1B. (1989). Multi-
relational semantic maps. Educational Psychology Review, 1, 331-367. -
*Lambiotte, J. G., Skaggs, L. P., & Dansereau, D. F. (1993). Learning from lectures:
Effects of knowledge maps and cooperative review strategies. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 483-497.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand
words. Cognitive Science, 11, 65-99.
*Lee, P. (1997). Integrating concept mapping and metacognitive methods in a hyper-
media environment for learning science (Doctoral dissertation, Purdue University,
1997). Dissertation Abstracts International, 58, 3405.
*Lehman, J. D., Carter, C., & Kahle, J. B. (1985). Concept mapping, vee mapping, and
achievement: Results of a field study with black high school students. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 22, 663-673.
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. Applied Social
Research Methods Series (Vol. 49). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
*Markow, P. G. (1996). The effects of student-constructed concept maps on achieve-
ment in a first-year college instructional chemistry laboratory (Doctoral dissertation,
University of Connecticut, 1996). Dissertation Abstracts International, 56, 3900.
Mayer, R. E. (1979). Can advance organizers influence meaningful learning? Review
of Educational Research, 49, 371-383.
437


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
McCagg, E. C., & Dansereau, D. F. (1991). A convergent paradigm for examining
knowledge mapping as a learning strategy. Journal of Educational Research, 84,
317-324.
Minagawa, J. (1999). Effect of making linking labels in concept mapping. Japanese
Journal of Educational Psychology, 47, 328-334.
Moore, D. W., & Readence, J. F. (1984). A quantitative and qualitative review of
graphic organizer research. Journal of Educational Research, 78, 11-17.
*Moreland, J. L., Dansereau, D. F., & Chmielewski, T. L. (1997). Recall of descriptive
information: The roles of presentation format, annotation strategy, and individual
differences. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 22, 521-533.
Moyer, J. C., Sowder, L., Threadgill-Sowder, J., & Moyer, M. B. (1984). Story problem
formats: Drawn versus verbal versus telegraphic. Journalfor Research in Mathe-
matics Education, 15, 342-351.
*Nesbit, J. C., & Adesope, 0. (2005). Dynamic concept maps. In P. Kommers &
G. Richards (Eds.), Proceedings of World Conference on Educational Multimedia,
Hypermedia and Telecommunications 2005 (pp. 4323-4329). Chesapeake, VA:
Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education.
*Nicoll, G., Francisco, J., & Nakhleh, M. (2001). An investigation of the value of using
concept maps in general chemistry. Journal of Chemical Education, 78, 1111-1117.
*Novak, A. D. (1994). The effects of cooperative learning with concept mapping in a
preservice teacher education course (Doctoral dissertation, Indiana University, 1994).
Dissertation Abstracts International, 56, 895.
Novak, J. D. (1990a). Concept maps and vee diagrams: Two metacognitive tools to
facilitate meaningful learning. Instructional Science, 19, 29-52.
Novak, J. D. (1990b). Concept mapping: A useful tool for science education. Journal
of Research in Science Teaching, 27, 937-949.
Novak, J. D. (1998). Learning, creating, and using knowledge: Concept maps asfacil-
itative tools in schools and corporations. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Novak, J. D. (2002). Meaningful learning: The essential factor for conceptual change
in limited or inappropriate propositional hierarchies leading to empowerment of
learners, Science Education, 86, 548-571.
Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D. B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
O'Donnell, A. M., Dansereau, D. F., & Hall, R. H. (2002). Knowledge maps as scaf-
folds for cognitive processing. Educational Psychology Review, 14, 71-86.
*Okebukola, P. A. (1990). Attaining meaningful learning of concepts in genetics and
ecology: An examination of the potency of the concept-mapping technique. Journal
of Research in Science Teaching, 27, 493-504.
*Okebukola, P. A. (1992). Concept mapping with a cooperative learning flavor. Ameri-
can Biology Teacher, 54, 218-221.
*Okebukola, P. A., & Jegede, 0. J. (1988). Cognitive preference and learning-mode as
determinants of meaningful learning through concept mapping. Science Education,
72, 489-500.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
*Pankratius, W. J. (1987). Building an organized knowledge base: Concept map-
ping and achievement in secondary school physics (Doctoral dissertation, Georgia
State University College of Education, 1987). Dissertation Abstracts Interna-
tional, 49, 474.
*Patterson, M. E. (1993). Conceptual analysis of spatial-semantic display processing
(knowledge maps) (Doctoral dissertation, Texas Christian University, 1993). Dis-
sertation Abstracts International, 55, 226.
438


=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
Learning With Concept and Knowledge Maps
*Patterson, M. E., Dansereau, D. F., & Newbem, D. (1992). Effects of communication
aids and strategies on cooperative teaching. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84,
453-461.
*Patterson, M. E., Dansereau, D. F., & Wiegmann, D. A. (1993). Receiving informa-
tion during a cooperative episode: Effects of communication aids and verbal ability.
Learning and Individual Differences, 5, 1-11.
*Potelle, H., & Rouet, J. (2003). Effect of content representation and readers' prior
knowledge on the comprehension of hypertext. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 58, 327-345.
*Prater, D. L., & Terry, C. A. (1988). Effects of mapping strategies on reading com-
prehension and writing performance. Reading Psychology, 9, 101-120.
Quillian, M. R. (1967). Word concepts: A theory and simulation of some basic semantic
capabilities. Behavioral Sciences, 12, 410-430..
*Rew6y, K. L., Dansereau, D., Dees, S., Skaggs, L., & Pitre, U. (1992). Scripted coop-
eration and knowledge map supplements: Effects on the recall of biological and sta-
tistical information. Journal of Experimental Education, 60, 93-107. :.
*Rewey, K. L., Dansereau, D. F., & Peel, J. L. (1991). Knowledge maps and informa-
tion processing strategies. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 16, 203-214.
*Rewey, K. L.,Dansereau, D. F., Skaggs, L. P., Hall, R. H., & Pitre, U. (1989). Effects
of scripted cooperation and knowledge maps on the processing of technical material.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 604-609.
*Reynolds, S. B., & Dansereau, D. (1990). The knowledge hypermap:.An alternative
to hypertext. Computers in Education, 14, 409-416.
*Reynolds, S. B., Patterson, M. E., Skaggs, L. P., & Dansereau, D. F, (1991).,Knowjl-
edge hypermap and cooperative learning. Computers in Education, 16, 167-173.
Roth, W. M., & Roychoudhury, A. (1993). The concept map as a tool-for the collabo-
rative construction of knowledge: A microanalysis of high school physics students.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30, 503-534.
Roth, W. M., & Roychoudhury, A. (1994). Science discourse through collaborative
concept-mapping: New perspectives for the teacher. International Journal of Science
Education, 6, 437-455.
*Salata, M. A. (1999). Concept maps as organizers in an introductory university level
biology course (Doctoral dissertation, University of Virginia, 1999). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 60, 1969.
*Schmid, R. F., & Telaro, G. (1990). Concept mapping as an instructional strategy for
high school biology. Journal of Educational Research, 84, 78-85.
*Smith, B. E. (1992). Linking theory and practice in teaching basic nursing skills, Jour-
nal of Nursing Education, 31, 16-23.
Sowa, J. F. (2000). Knowledge representation: Logical, philosophical, and computa-
tional foundation. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks Cole.
*Spaulding, D. T. (1989). Concept mapping and achievement in high school biology
and chemistry (Doctoral dissertation, Florida Institute of Technology, 1989). Dis-
sertation Abstracts International, 50, 1619.
Stensvold, M. S., & Wilson, J. T. (1990). The interaction of verbal ability with concept
mapping in learning from a chemistry laboratory activity. Science Education, 74,
473-480.
Stock, W. A., Kulhavy, R. W., Peterson, S. E., Hancock, T. E., & Verdi, M. P.
(1995). Mental representations of maps and verbal descriptions: Evidence they
may affect text memory differently. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 20,
237-256.
Stoyanova, N., & Kommers, P. (2002). Concept mapping as a medium of shared cog-
nition in computer-supported collaborative problem solving. Journal of Interactive
Learning Research, 13, 111-133.
439


=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
Nesbit & Adesope
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2001). Using multivariate statistics (4th ed). Boston:
Allyn & Bacon.
Takumi, I. (2001). Hierarchical concept maps: Effect on writing. Japanese Journal of
Educational Psychology, 49, 11-20.
*Udupa, P. S. (1992). Concept Mapping/Cooperative Learning as a technique to improve
the learning of "at-risk" and nondisabled students (Doctoral dissertation, University
of Minnesota, 1992). Dissertation Abstracts International, 53, 2757.
*Umar, I. N. (1999). A study of the effects of cognitive styles and learning strategies
among Malaysian pre-college students in a hypermedia environment. (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1999). Dissertation Abstracts International,
61, 145.
van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., Roelofs, E., & Erkens, G. (2002). Collaborative con-
cept mapping: Provoking and supporting meaningful discourse. Theory Into Practice,
41, 40-46.
Verdi, M. P., & Kulhavy, R. W. (2002). Learning with maps and texts: An overview.
Educational Psychology Review, 14, 27-46.
*Wachter, L. N. (1993). An investigation of the effects of hierarchical concept map-
ping as a prefatory organizer on fourth-grade students' comprehension and retention
of expository prose (Doctoral dissertation, Pennsylvania State University, 1993).
Dissertation Abstracts International, 54, 2106.
*Wallace, D. S., West, S. C., Ware, A. M., & Dansereau, D. F. (1998). The effect of
knowledge maps that incorporate gestalt principles on learning. Journal of Experi-
mental Education, 67, 5-16.
Weinstein, C. E., & Mayer, R. E. (1986) The teaching of learning strategies. In M. C.
Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook on Research in Teaching (3rd ed., pp. 315-327). New
York: Macmillan.
*Wiegmann, D. A. (1992). On the dual processing of spatial-graphic and verbal informa-
tion (Doctoral dissertation, Texas Christian University, 1992). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 53, 3193.
Wiegmann, D. A., Dansereau, D. F., & McCagg, E. C. (1992). Effects of knowledge map
characteristics on information processing. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
17, 136-155.
*Willerman, M., & Mac Harg, R. A. (1991). The concept map as an advance organizer.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 705-712.
Winn, W. (1991). Learning from maps and diagrams. Educational Psychology Review,
3, 211-247.
*Zittle, F. J. (2001). The effect of web-based concept mapping on analogical transfer
(Doctoral dissertation, University of New Mexico, 2001). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 62, 3695.
Authors
JOHN C. NESBIT is an Associate Professor at Simon Fraser University, Faculty of Edu-
cation, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC, Canada, V5A 1S6; e-mail nesbit@sfii.ca.
He conducts research on self-regulated learning with multimedia and cognitive tools,
and collaborative evaluation of learning resources.
OLUSOLA 0. ADESOPE is a doctoral student at Simon Fraser University, Faculty of Edu-
cation, Burnaby, BC, Canada, V5A 1S6; e-mail ooa@sfit.ca. His research interests include
learning with interactive concept maps and diagrams, and application of self-regulated
learning models to enhance learning with multimedia resources.
440


=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
APPENDIX A
Coded effect sizes ,
Study
Abayomi (1988), dissertation
Effect of map construction versus
outlining on science achievement.
Amer (1994)
Effect of cooperative mapping
versus underlining on recall.
Effect of cooperative mapping
versus text reading on recall.
Bahr & Dansereau (2001)
Effect of bilingual maps versus
lists on recall of German-English
word pairs.
Bahr & Dansereau (2005)
Effect of bilingual maps versus lists
on recall of German-English word
pairs.
Blankenship & Dansereau (2000)
Effect of animated map versus
animated text on recall of
information macrostructure.
Bodolus (1986), dissertation
Effect of constructing maps versus
teacher's chosen activity on science
achievement.
Chang, Sung, & Chen (2002)
Effect of map correction versus text
reading on comprehension ability.
Effect of map scaffolding versus text
reading on comprehension ability.
Effect of map construction versus
text reading on comprehension
ability.
Effect of map correction versus text
reading on summarization ability.
Effect of map scaffolding versus text
reading on summarization ability.
Effect of map construction versus
text reading on summarization
ability.
Chang (1994), dissertation
Effect of mapping+outlining versus
outlining on biology achievement.
Effect of mapping versus outlining
on biology achievement.
Chularut & DeBacker (2004)
Effect of concept mapping versus
study and discussion on
achievement.
Grade
8
N Setting
156 Classroom
PS 99 Classroom
PS 77 Laboratory
PS 43 Laboratory
PS 64 Laboratory
9 244 Classroom
5 126 Classroom
7 187 Classroom
PS 79 Classroom
Effect size (g)
0.35
0.49
0.95
0.48
0.59
0.70
0.11
0.84
0.33
0.20
1.14
0.80
0.30
-0.41
-0.23
2.16
(continued)
441


=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
APPENDIX A (Continued)
Study
Clibum (1985), dissertation
Effect of map-structured lectures
on retention.
Czerniak & Haney (1998)
Effect of cooperative mapping versus
lecture on comprehension.
Dees (1989), dissertation
Effect of map versus text on
low-verbal-ability learners' recall.
Effect of map versus text on
high-verbal-ability learners' recall
Esiobu & Soyibo (1995)
Effect of individual concept and vee
mapping versus lectures on biology
achievement.
Effect of cooperative concept and vee
mapping versus lectures on biology
achievement.
Guastello, Beasle, & Sinatra (2000)
Effect of mapping versus read-and-
discuss in low-achieving students.
Hall & O'Donnell (1996)
Effect of studying maps versus text
on superordinate idea recall.
Effect of studying maps versus text
on subordinate idea recall.
Hall & Sidio-Hall (1994)
Effect of studying color-coded map
versus color-coded text on recall.
Hall, Dansereau, & Skaggs (1992)
Effect of presenting maps versus text
on recall.
Jegede, Alayemola, & Okebukola (1990)
Effect of map construction versus
lectures on biology achievement.
Jolly (1998), dissertation
Effect of mapping on science problem
solving.
Lambiotte & Dansereau (1992)
Effect of map versus outline on
high-prior-knowledge learners'
central idea recall.
Effect of map versus list on
high-prior-knowledge learners'
central idea recall.
Effect of map versus outline on
low-prior-knowledge learners'
central idea recall.
Grade
PS
N Setting
70 Classroom
PS 118 Classroom
PS 143 Laboratory
10 808 Classroom
7 124 Varied
PS 43 Laboratory
PS 118 Laboratory
PS 92 Laboratory
10 51 Classroom
6 36 Classroom
PS 74 Laboratory
442
Effect size (g)
0.68
0.75
0.42
-0.36
1.93
1.34
5.94
0.43
0.88
0.29
0.55
1.54
0.44
0.38
-0.76
0.49


=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
I-.
APPENDIX A (Continued)
Study Grade N Setting Effect size (g)
Effect of map versus list on
low-prior-knowledge learners'
central idea recall.
Effect of map versus outline on
high-prior-knowledge learners'
detail idea recall.
Effect of map versus list on
high-prior-knowledge learners'
detail idea recall.
Effect of map versus outline on
low-prior-knowledge learners'
detail idea recall.
Effect of map versus list on
low-prior-knowledge learners' detail
idea recall.
Lambiotte, Skaggs, & Dansereau (1993)
Effect of individually studying maps
versus lists on recall.
Effect of cooperatively studying maps
versus lists on recall.
Effect of individually studying maps
versus lists on problem solving.
Effect of cooperatively studying maps
versus lists on problem solving.
Lee (1997), dissertation
Effect of navigational maps versus
lists in hypermedia.
Effect of navigational maps
versus lists in hypermedia with
metacognitive cues.
Lehman, Carter, & Kahle (1985)
Effect of mapping and vee heuristics
versus outlining on biology
achievement.
Effect of mapping and vee heuristics
versus outlining on biology
relationship knowledge.
Markow (1996), dissertation
Effect of mapping versus objective
and essay writing on chemistry
achievement.
McCagg & Dansereau (1991)
Effect of mapping versus
.self-selected study strategies on
psychology recall.
Moreland, Dansereau, &
Chmielew (1997)
Effect of annotating maps versus
text on recall.
PS 85 Classroom
PS 67 Laboratory
9 377" Classroom
PS 32 Laboratory
PS 81 'Varied
PS 64 Laboratory
0.69
2
0.02
7-,0.43
0.15
0.33
-0.02
0.11
-0.10
0.00
0.43
-0.29
0.08
0.28
-0.31'
0.33
0.36
(continued)
443


=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
APPENDIX A (Continued)
Study
Nesbit & Adesope (2005)
Effects of studying animated map
versus animated text on free recall.
Effects of studying animated map
versus animated text on retention
and transfer.
Nicoll, Francisco, & Nakhleh (2001)
Effect of mapping on understanding
of relationships among chemistry
concepts.
Novak (1994), dissertation
Effect of cooperative mapping versus
lecture and demo on AV ed-tech
achievement.
Okebukola (1990)
Effect of mapping versus lectures
on ecology achievement.
Okebukola (1992)
Effect of individual mapping versus
lectures and discussions on biology
achievement.
Effect of cooperative mapping versus
lectures and discussions on biology
achievement.
Okebukola & Jegede (1988)
Effect of cooperative and individual
mapping versus lectures on biology
achievement.
Pankratius (1987), dissertation
Effect of mapping versus additional
experiment on physics problem
solving.
Patterson (1993)
Effect of studying map versus text
on recall.
Patterson, Dansereau, &
Wiegmann (1993)
Effect of map versus text in peer-
teaching low-verbal-ability learners.
Effects of map versus text in peer-
teaching high-verbal-ability learners.
Patterson, Dansereau, &
Newbern (1992)
Effect of cooperative learning with
maps versus text on recall.
Potelle & Rouet (2003)
Effect of navigation with maps versus
alphabetical list on thematic recall.
PS 89 Classroom
PS 20 Classroom
PS 30 Classroom
PS 138 Classroom
11 147 Classroom
PS 145 Classroom
12 87 Classroom
PS 181 Laboratory
PS 38 Laboratory
PS 101 Laboratory
PS 47 Laboratory
444
Grade N Setting Effect size (g)
0.96
0.65
1.03
0.23
1.53
0.34
1.54
1.85
0.45
0.42
0.52
-0.22
0.39
0.07


=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
APPENDIX A (Continued)
Study
Prater & Terry (1988)
Effect of teacher-led mapping versus
teacher-led discussion on story
comprehension.
Reynolds & Dansereau (1990)
Effect of studying with hypermaps
versus hypertexts on recall.
Reynolds et al. (1991)
Effect of studying with hypermaps
versus hypertexts on recall.
Rewey, Dansereau, & Peel (1991)
Effect of studying map versus
studying text on central idea recall.
Effect of summarizing map versus
summarizing text on central
idea recall.
Effect of studying map versus
studying text on detail idea recall.
Effect of summarizing map versus
summarizing text on detail
idea recall.
Rewey et al. (1992)
Effect of individual study with map
versus text on low-ability learners'
recall.
Effect of individual study with map
versus text on high-ability learners'
recall.
Effect of cooperative study with map
versus text on low-ability learners'
recall.
Effect of cooperative study with map
versus text on high-ability learners'
recall.
Rewey et al. (1989)
Effect of individual study of map
versus text on recall.
Effect of dyadic study of map versus
text on recall.
Salata (1999), dissertation
Effect of presenting lecture content
with maps versus outlines on recall.
Schmid & Telaro (1990)
Effect of mapping versus lectures on
biology achievement.
Effect of mapping versus lectures on
understanding of relations between
biology concepts.
Grade
5
N
30
Setting
Classroom
PS 33 Lýboratory
PS 38 Laboratory
PS 96 Laboratory
PS 121 Laboratory
PS 104 Laboratory
PS 170 - Classroom
11 43 Classroom
Effect size (g)
0.76
-0.12
0.03
0.07
-0.34
0.53
-0.14
0.12
0.32
0.38
0.07
0.20
0.08
0.43
0.35
0.89
(continued)
445


=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
APPENDIX A (Continued)
Study
Skaggs (1988)
Effect of studying maps versus text
on recall of main ideas.
Effect of studying maps versus text
on recall of detail ideas.
Smith (1992)
Effect of reviewing readings with
maps and vee heuristics versus
discussion on recall.
Spaulding (1989), dissertation
Effect of mapping concepts versus
defining concepts on biology
achievement.
Effect of mapping concepts versus
defining concepts on chemistry
achievement.
Udupa (1992), dissertation
Effect of cooperative mapping versus
individual study on recall.
Umar (1999), dissertation
Effect of map as introductory page
in hypermedia.
Effect of map versus text as
introductory page in hypermedia.
Effect of map versus outline as
introductory page in hypermedia.
Wachter (1993), dissertation
Effect of studying complete map
before reading text on delayed recall.
Effect of studying incomplete map
before reading text on delayed recall.
Wallace & West (1998)
Effect of studying maps versus text
on recall.
Effect of studying gestalt-enhanced
maps versus text on recall.
Wiegmann (1992), dissertation
Effect of presenting map versus text
on microstructure retention.
Effect of presenting map versus text
on macrostructure retention.
Willerman & Mac Harg (1991)
Effect of map copying versus
introductory presentation as
advance organizer.
Zittle (2001), dissertation
Effect of presenting maps versus text
summaries on analogical transfer.
Effect of presenting interactive maps
versus text summaries on analogical
transfer.
Grade
PS
N
103
Setting
Laboratory
PS 42 Classroom
10 151 Classroom
10 32 Classroom
PS 116 Classroom
4 120 Varied
PS 40 Laboratory
PS 143 Laboratory
8 82 Classroom
PS 139 Laboratory
Note. PS = postsecondary, N= number of subjects.
446
Effect size (g)
0.33
-0.26
0.91
0.17
0.07
0.41
0.09
-0.01
-0.08
0.65
0.59
0.35
1.10
0.78
1.37
0.42
0.34
1.23


=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
APPENDIX B
Weighted mean effect sizes for outcome constructs and test formats
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect size interval of effect size
Category N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
Maps constructed
Outcome construct
Retention only
Retention
and transfer
455 6 .805* .101 .606 1.004 51.025* 5
1,084 12 .339* .062 .217 .462 57.455* 11
Test format
Free or interview 101 2 .454* .202 .057 .851 1.787 1
recall
Objective 977 9 .328* .660 .199 .457 56.043* 8
Short answer 166 2 1.773* .186 1.408 2.138 10.660* 1
Mixed item types 295 5 .392* .120 .157 .626 1.241 4
Maps studied
Outcome construct
Retention only
Transfer only
Retention
and transfer
2,195 33 .355* .044 .269 .441 50.227* 32
139 1 .827
324 6 .317* .114 .093 .541, 9.245 5
Test format
Free recall, 1,740 29 .352* .049 .256 .449 45.084* 28
Objective 461 4 .573* .097 .384 .763 3.457 3
Mixed itemtypes 457 7 .245* .099 .051 .438 11.160 6
* p <. 05 .
447


=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
APPENDIX C
Weighted mean effect sizes for methodological quality and document type
95% Confidence Homogeneity
Effect size interval of effect size
Category N k M SE Lower Upper Q df
Maps constructed
Confidence in effect size
Low or medium 1,225 12 .286* .058 .172 .400 15.938 11
High 314 6 1.386* .131 1.129 1.643 48.851* 5
Treatment fidelity
Low or medium 583 7 .565* .087 .394 .736 67.892* 6
High 956 11 .409* .067 .278 .541 53.868* 10
Random assignment
Yes 389 6 1.092* .114 .870 1.315 64.531* 5
No 1,150 12 .292* .060 .174 .410 20.484* 11
Document type
Journal article 772 9 .730* .077 .580, .881 97.347* 8
Dissertation 767 9 .225* .074 .081 .370 3.920 8
Maps studied
Confidence in effect size
Low or medium 466 7 .335* .094 .150 .520 6.228 6
High 2,192 33 .381* .044 .294 .467 59.461* 32
Treatment fidelity
Low ormedium 454 7 .421* .101 .224 .618 11.647 6
High 2,204 33 .363* .044 .278 .449 53.962* 32
Random assignment
Yes 2,336 37 .357* .043 .274 .441 63.990* 36
No 322 3 .479* .113 .257 .700 .876 2
Document type
Journal article 1,448 28 .319* .054 .213 .424 23.475 27
Dissertation 1,210 12 .439* .060 .322 .556 40.177* 11
*p < .05.
448


=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
COPYRIGHT INFORMATION
TITLE: Learning With Concept and Knowledge Maps: A
Meta-Analysis
SOURCE: Review of Educational Research 76 no3 Fall 2006
PAGE(S): 413-48
WN: 0628800924008
The magazine publisher is the copyright holder of this article and it
is reproduced with permission. Further reproduction of this article in
violation of the copyright is prohibited. To contact the publisher:
http://www.aera.net/
Copyright 1982-2006 The H.W. Wilson Company.  All rights reserved.